



CHAPTER VIII 

THE MEANING OF PHILOSOPHERS 


What do you read, my lord ? Polonius. 

Words, words, words  Hamlet. 

“ O wondrous power of words, by simple faith 
Licensed to take the meaning that we love.” 

Thus the poet; and observation does not invalidate 
the perspicacious remark. It might, however, have 
been supposed that logicians and psychologists would 
have devoted special attention to meaning, since it is 
so vital for all the issues with which they are concerned. 
But that this is not the case will be evident * to anyone 
who studies the Symposium in Mind (October 1920 and 
following numbers) on “The Meaning of ‘Meaning.’” 

It is perhaps unnecessary to point out that such 
brief extracts from lengthy philosophical disquisitions 
as the limits of this chapter allow, cannot fairly represent 
any given author’s views upon that, whatever it may 
be, if anything, for which he uses the word ‘ meaning.’ 
Some quotations, however, do tell their own tale; but 
even where no actual absurdity transpires, the resort 

* The foUowmg passage m Nuces Phtlosopktcee, by one Edward 
Johnson, published in 1842, is worth recalhng. 

" A I confess I am surprised that all this time you have never 
yet once asked me what I mean by the word meaning. 

“ B What then do you mean by the word meamng ’ 

" C Be patient You can only learn the meaning of the word 
meamng from the consideration of the nature of ideas, 
and their connection with things." 

Half a century later, lAdy Welby quoted from this author in Mind 
(i8g6), and complained that " Sense in the meaning sense has never 
yet been taken as a centre to work out from attention, perception, 
memory, judgment, etc, have never been crossexamined from the 
direction of their common relation to a ‘ meamng ’ " And after tiie 
lapse of a further twentyfive years we find Mr Russell admitting 
(" On Propositions What they are and how they mean " Proc. 
■Anst Soc 1919) with the approval of Dr Schiller in the symposium 
" that logicians have done very little towards explainmg the relation 
called ‘ meamng ' " 


160 



THE MEANING OF PHILOSOPHERS i6i 

to such a term in serious argument, as though it had 
some accepted use, or as though the author’s use were 
at once obvious, is a practice to be discredited. 

Dr Schiller began by announcing that the Greek 
language is “so defective that it can hardly be said 
to have a vocabulary for the notion ” of meaning at all; 
and in proceeding to state his own view that “ meaning 
is essentially personal .... what anything means 
depends on who means it,” he found it necessary to 
traverse Mr Russell’s dictum that “ the problem of the 
MEANING of words is reduced to the problem of the 
meaning of images.” Mr Russell replied by en-
deavouring “to give more precision to the definition 
of MEANING by introducing the notion of ‘ mnemic 
causation ’ ” and succeeded thereby in evolving an 
instructive description of metaphysics. “ A word,” he 
explained, “which aims at complete generality, such 
as ‘entity,’ for example, will have to be devoid of 
mnemic effects, and therefore of meaning. In practice, 
this is not the case: such words have verbal associa-
tions, the learning of which constitutes the study of 
metaphj'sics.” Mr Joachim, who elected to stand aside 
from the discussion, professed to find Mr Russell 
“asserting that nobody can possibly think" and con-
fined himself to an analysis of the function of images, 
drawing attention in a footnote to the fact that for 
Mr Russell meaning appeared (amongst other things) 
as ‘a relation,’ that “a relation ‘constitutes’ meaning, 
and that a word not only ‘ has ’ meaning, but is related 
‘ to its meaning.’ ” 

This whole episode was characterized by Dr Schiller 
six months later (April, 1921, p. 185) as presenting “ the 
usual features of a philosophic discussion. That is to 
say, it reads like a triangular duel, in which each 
participant aims at something different, and according 
to the other misses it, and hits a phantom.” In dealing 
with details he quotes Mr Russell’s remark that “all 
the words in which Dr Schiller endeavours to describe 



i 62 the meaning of MEANING 

his unobservable entities imply that after all he can 
observe them,” as a typical case of “the overriding of 
actual MEANING by verbal, which could hardly be 
surpassed from the writings of Mr Bradley.” 

In July Mr Alfred Sidgwick explained (p. 285) that 
“ MEANING depends on consequences, and truth depends 
on MEANING ; ” and Professor Strong intervened (p. 313) 
as a ‘ critical realist ’ to meet Dr Schiller’s objections 
to Mr Russell and to render the latter’s theory intelli-
gible to Mr Joachim. He illustrated his rendering by 
imagining an explosion. When we hear what we call 
an explosion, “ the sound has not so much acquired, 
as become converted into a meaning. . . . What is 
nonconcrete and nonsensuous is always a meaning, 
a sense of that unfathomed beyond which we cannot 
contemplate but only intend. . . . To mean something 
is to conceive or rather treat it as not wholly revealed 
to the mind at the moment.” 

To this Dr Schiller rejoins that Dr Strong always 
confines his attention to the case “ in which an ‘ object ’ 
is said to ‘mean soandso.’” This, he thinks, “im-
poses on him the duties of deriving the personal mean-
ing, and of explaining the relativity of ‘ the ’ meaning 
of an object to various cognitive purposes and personal 
meanings” (p. 445). He concludes (p. 447) that “the 
existence of personal meaning remains a pitfall in the 
path of all intellectual ism.” The controversy is pre-
sumably still in progress. 

Contemporaneously with the Symposium on Meaning 
which appeared in Mind, an inquiry into the nature of 
Aphasia was appearing in Brain ^ and during the dis-
cussion of Dr Head’s views the question of meaning 
came to the front. A special memorandum suggested 
by the treatment of ‘semantic aphasia,’ was handed in 
by Dr J. Herbert Parsons,” and it throws interesting 

1 1920 Vol XLIII , Parts II and IV 

“ " The Psychology of ' Meaning ’ in its Relation to Aphasia " 
Ibid , p 441 



THE MEANING OF PHILOSOPHERS 163 


light on the degree of assistance which neurologists 
can be expected to derive from the work of philosophers 
in this held. According to Dr Parsons, at the lowest 
biological level “it would be unwise to deny the 
presence of a plus or minus affective toneand this is 
the primitive germ of ‘meaning.’” At the perceptual 
level, however, “the relatively undifferentiated psycho-
plasm is differentiated into specialized affective and 
cognitive elements, which are reintegrated, thus under-
going a synthesis which is the ‘ meaning ’ of the given 
experience. Perceptual ‘ meaning ’ suffused with affec-
tive tone, issues in instinctive conative activity.” Thus 
at the end of the completed reaction “the ‘meaning’ 
has become enriched and complicated. . . . This altered 
‘ meaning ’ is stored up, and, though depressed below 
the threshold of consciousness, is capable of "being 
revived. . . . The integration and synthesis of the 
already more plastic psychoplasm results in a higher, 
more complex type of ‘ meaning.’ ” Later the influence 
of social environment makes itself felt, and in the com-
plicated process of social intercourse “ the ultimate 
results are equivalent to an interaction of old and new 
‘ meanings,’ resulting in an infinity of still newer, richer 
and more refined ‘ meanings.’” At this stage “the 
creative activities assume a synergy at a higher level,” 
and “show a projicience hitherto absent.” The child’s 
“ gestures are no longer merely passive signs of his 
mind’s activities, but active indications of his feelings 
and desires. This is the dawn of language.” 1 

A detailed analysis of the Mtnd Symposium might 
have been instructive as a preliminary to the framing 
of a set of definitions, but its technique was unusually 
disappointing,^ and since in any case the metaphysical 
arena of the Old World inevitably suggests to many 
an atmosphere of barren logomachy, we may more 

^ Owing largely to the temperamental incompatibility of the sym 
posiasts Mr Russell, moreover, has now superseded his contribution 
by the relevant chapters of hi’ Analysis of Mtnd, to which reference 
has already been made (p 54) 



i64 the meaning OF MEANING 

profitably deal with the confusions which arise as 
occasion allows and cite here the procedure of the 
latest cooperative product of the New. The Essays in 
Critical Realism^ which made their appearance in 1920, 
are the work of seven American Professors who have 
revised and redrafted their language until it met the 
approval of all the other essayists. They are the fruits 
of a decade of controversy in a limited controversial 
field, where “ our familiarity with one another’s mean-
ing has enabled us to understand methods of expression 
from which at first we were inclined to dissent.” The 
main issues of the controversy had already been elabor-
ated, as the result of conferences begun in 19089, in a 
similar cooperative volume by six Neorealists. The 
final outcome may be regarded as the clarification of 
the life’s work of a dozen specialists, ail of whom have 
been continuously improving their mutual terminology 
in the full view of the public for over a decade. 

With the earlier volume we need not here concern 
ourselves except to note that in the Introduction, where 
a scrupulous use of words and the importance of clear 
definitions are insisted on, there occur the following 
remarks; 

“In exact discourse the meaning of every term must be 
reviewed ” , 

" If we cannot express our meaning in exact terms, let us at 
least cultivate literature ’' 

“ Idealism has meant nothmg to the actual psychologist." 

while in the final essay we find Professor Pitkin 
objecting at a crucial point that Alexander and Nunn 
“treat only the stuff of hallucinatory objects as real, 
leaving the erroneous meanings more or less products 
of a construing mind.” 

Since that date, 1912, the word ‘meaning’ has not 
ceased to play a decisive part in every dispute, and as 
the Critical Realists have had such ample opportunity 
of avoiding any ambiguities into which the Neo 



THE MEANING OF PHILOSOPHERS 165 

Realists may have fallen, we may, as far as Realism is 
concerned, confine ourselves to their efforts. 

First comes Professor Drake, of Vassar : 

"Tlie very meaning of ‘ existence ’ involves a definite locus " 
(P 16) 

"The very meanisg of the term ‘relation’ includes refer-
ence to something related " (p ig). 

These two statements are used to lead up to the view 
that perceptual data “cannot be the same existents as 
their causes,” and that we “get back somewhere to 
qualities.” 

It would be a large undertaking, continues Professor 
Lovejoy, to “analyse the meanings” of the formula-
tions of Pragmatism, which “ began as a theory con-
cerning the conditions under which concepts and 
propositions may be said to possess meaning, and 
concerning the nature of that in which all meanings 
must consist” The pragmatist, he holds, ignores the 
patent fact that “ many of our meanings are retro-
spective. . . . No logical hocuspocus can transub-
stantiate the MEANING ‘yesterday’ into the meaning 
‘ tomorrow ’ . . . . It is, in very truth, a meaning 
intrinsically incapable of directlyexperienced fulfil-
ment. . . . Without ever actually experiencing the 
fulfilment of these meanings, we nevertheless have an 
irresistible propensity to believe that some of them are 
in fact valid meanings. ... A judgment is its own 
master in deciding what it means, though not in 
deciding as to the fulfilment of its meanings.” 

According to Professor Pratt, the NeoRealists 
“performed a most fruitful piece of analysis in insist-
ing that the data presented to our thought consist of 
MEANINGS or natures,” but they did not distinguish 
“between these meanings and the sensational part of 
our mental states on the one hand and the existential 
physical objects to which the meanings are attributed 
on the other.” A number of people might describe 
their conception of anything differently though all 



i66 THE MEANING OF MEANING 

“meant, or thought of, the same thing.” He pro-
ceeds to distinguish (p. 90) between the meaning which 
one entertains in conception “and images which are 
the ‘ vehicle ’ of our meaning. This meaning is that 
which we find directly given to our thought,” and he 
holds “this meaning or datum is often capable of 
exact definition, t.e., it has, or rather ts, a definable 
nature.” Perception, equally with conception, “con-
tains not merely sensuous and revived images but a 
large element of meaning as well.” Usually, All the 
sensed qualities are included within those meant." As 
regards outer reference (p. 92) “this may be regarded 
as part of the datum or meaning of perception, but it 
is an easily distinguishable part.” Thanks to past 
reactions, the qualitygroup “ of which one is aware, 
directly means more than it is. As a result of all 
one’s past experience it has come to stand for an 
active entity.” This qualitygroup “means, or tm 
mediately implies to the individual the presence and, 
to a considerable extent, the nature of some active 
entity of which it is well for him to be aware. It is 
in short tlie means of his perceiving the object." In con-
clusion he maintains that though Critical Realists 
“do not pretend to an exhaustive knowledge of the 
inner nature of physical entities, we have defined them 
sufficiently to know what we mean by*them, and to 
make that meaning perfectly plain to every one but 
the perversely blind.” 

Professor Rogers of Yale, who deals with Error, 
complains that Bosanquet failed to understand the 
question of “ degrees of truth ” because of his “ annoy-
ing refusal to keep sharply separate the varying mean-
ings of terms. It is not a question whether the same 
form of words means the same thing to different people. 
It is a question whether any given meaning singly, 
whatever it may be, is successful in corresponding to 
the fact” (p. 123). Of Mr Joachim’s account of things 
in terms of systems, he remarks that “If we insist on 



THE MEANING OF PHILOSOPHERS 167 

defining the meaning of a fact in terms of its place in 
a system, naturally it will cease to have that meaning 
outside the system ” (p. 125). 

As regards identity “ we naturally make a clear 
distinction between the characters of things as em-
bodied in MEANINGS which we attribute to them, and 
the real existence of these characters in the things 
themselves. . . . The ‘identity of indiscernibles’ ap-
plies to abstract logical meanings, not to existents. 
Meanings we may call the sameprovided we can 
detect no difference in them^just because their ‘char-
acter ’ is all there is to them; but things are not 
necessarily the same when they are alike” (p. 131). 
Professor Holt’s analysis is, he thinks, an “approxim-
ately correct account of what the critical realist intends 
to refer to under the head of essences, or human mean-
ings. But for him the problem of knowledge consists, 
not merely in the presence of these meanings pr data, 
but in their reference to the actual object” (p. 133). 
Professor Perry’s difficulties as regards error vanish 
if we grant the distinction “between the something 
as an existent about which I have a belief, and the some-
thing (as an intellectual content or meaning or essence) 
which I believe about it.” When in error, we have a 
'•MEANING before the mind,” and wrongly suppose that 
it characterises a real object. 

Dr Santayana urges that though without our animal 
bodies “ appearance would lose its seat and its focus, 
and without an external object would lose its signifi-
cance,” we can yet take appearance absolutely and 
“inhibit all reaction and understanding”; but since 
even the passive and immediate data of appearance, 
“its bare signals and language when stupidly gazed 
at” have aesthetic reality, “the special and insidious 
kind of reality opposed to appearance must mean an 
underlying reality, a substance ■ and it had better be 
called by that name.” And he introduces to us 
Essences = U niversals = I ntuited aesthetic data“ sym 



i68 THE MEANING OF MEANING 

bols of sense or thought” (p. 165), which may be 
identical with the essences embodied in the substance 
though “the intention and the embodiment remain 
different in existence, origin, date, place, substance, 
function and duration.” 

That the individual’s field of experience “has a 
certain structure, and is shot through with meanings 
and affirmations,” seems to Professor Sellars of Michi-
gan “a matter of undeniable fact.” The chief error 
of much contemporary thought is the refusal to recog-
nize “that thinghood and perception go together” ; in 
other words, in the percipient, “we have the content 
of perception, and over against it in a qualifying way, 
the motor complex of adjustment combined with the 
realistic meanings and expectations which are char-
acteristic of perception.” What is needed is, he holds, 
“a patient and persistent analysis which is able to go 
forward step by step while doing justice to the structure 
and MEANINGS of the individual’s experience ” (p. 197). 
And as regards knowledge of the past, “we can mean 
a reality which no longer exists equally with a reality 
which exists at the time of the intention ” (p. 215). 

Professor Sellars makes the following distinction : 

" Knowledge of other concurrences is different from know-
ledge of the physical world It is a knowledge through asserted 
identity of content, whereas knowledge of the 'physical world 
IS information about data Thus when I mterpret an expression 
on the face of my friend as meaning amusement I use the ex-
pression as a symbol of an experience which I regard as in its 
essentials the same for him as for me " (p 217). 

Finally Professor Strong who examines the nature 
of the ‘datum,’ which he replaces by Santayana’s 
‘ essence ’ (which, as we have seen, is regarded by 
Critical Realism as also equivalent to ‘ meaning ’), con-
cludes that data are in their nature “not existences 
but universals, the bare natures of the objects, in such 
wise that the essence embodied and the essence given 
may be the same.” 



THE MEANING OF PHILOSOPHERS 169 

“ What is given to us in senseperception,” we learn 
(p. 235), “ is the sensation as a meaning, or to speak 
more correctly what is given is the meaning and not 
the sensation .... That this significance, or meaning, 
or essence is not an existence and not in time and space, 
but, like the meaning when we think of a universal, 
a purely logical entity, is quite credible ”; moreover, 
the datum “ is not properly a sensible fact. We cannot 
actually find it as a feeling, we can only tend towards 
it or MEAN it. . . . A meaning here is not to be 
understood as a peculiar kind of feeling, but as a 
function which the feeling discharges ” (p. 237). 

We need not here attempt to correlate these different 
uses of the term in what claims to be the last achieve-
ment of coordinated symbolization. As might have 
been expected this statement with its challenge to Neo 
Realists, Pragmatists, and Idealists aroused abundant 
controversy, but the one inevitable source of mis-
understanding and disagreement, the omnipresence of 
the term Meaning, was allowed to pass unchallenged. 
It seems to have been accepted without question into 
the vocabulary of American philosophy, for use on all 
occasions of uncertainty,* though to the English reader 
it still happily sounds strange in most of its typical 
contexts. 

But lest the uninitiated should suppose that Meta-
physicians and Critical Realists are peculiar in their 
method, we may turn to the use made of the word by a 
psychologist. For over twenty years the writings of 
Professor Hugo Munsterberg exercised a powerful in-
fluence on thought in England and in Germany, no less 
than in America. His Eternal Values (igog) appeared 
first in German and then in an improved and revised 
form in English. It claims to be carefully and system 

* Tbe treatment of the term * meaning ’ by Professor Sellars in his 
mdependent volumes, Cntual Realism (1916) and Evolutionary 
Naturalism (1921), is exemplified by the following dictum in the former 

S ) 282) *' As a MXAKiNG, knowledge precedes truth, which is a re 

ective deepemng of the sense of knowledge m the light of au awakened 
doubt." 



THE MEANING OF MEANING 


170 

atically written, a protest against the impressionistic 
American style of philosophizing, much of which “has 
become antagonistic to the real character of philosophy.” 
Already in his Preface he assures us that sincere con-
viction gave the real aim and meaning to his work. 
On his first page his way of admitting that tastes may 
differ is to say that “the beauties of one school may 
MEAN ugliness to another ” ; on his second the words 
“To profess idealism never means to prove it right” 
indicate that asseveration and proof are not the same ; 
on his third he informs us that “the world longs for a 
new expression of the meaning of life and reality.” 
On page 4 we read that for the sciences to urge criticism 
of their foundations “means that they ask about the real 
value of truth” ; that in practical affairs “the meaning 
of life IS in danger” ; that we need “a new philosophy 
which may give meaning to life and reality.” Page 5 

" The MEANING of what is valuable must decide our view of 
the world.” 

"Philosophy needs to understand what the fundamental 
MEANING of any valuation is " 

"The philosopher keeps for his own inquiry what the real 
MEANING of special facts may be, and what it means to have 
knowledge of fee world at all " 

Part I is entitled ‘The Meaning of Values’ and on 
the SIX pages 7479 which reveal “the deciding fact” 
the term ‘ meaning ’ appears no less than sixteen times. 
The deciding fact is that we demand that things recur. 
“We demand that there be a world ; that means that 
our experience be more than just passing experience. 
Here is the original deed which gives eternal meaning 
to our reality ” (p. 75). The world becomes a world 
by Its identical recurrence, and this identity means 
fulfilment, means satisfaction, means value” (p. 79). 

In passing it may be noted that identity does not 
exclude change, for it is postulated that whatever 
changes “ must still present an identity in its changes 
by showing that the change belongs to its own 



THE MEANING OF PHILOSOPHERS 171 

MEANING.” Indeed “our question as to the validity 
of pure values can have no other meaning except in 
reference to this true world,” the world “of our experi-
ences in so far as they assert themselves;” and “it 
would be MEANINGLESS to deny the question. 

To complete the argument with this accommodating 
linguistic material, it would seem that since its identical 
recurrence presumably is the ‘ meaning ’ of anything, 
and since the ‘ meaning ’ of anything is presumably its 
value, the statement above that “ identical recurrence 
means value ” might equally well have appeared in the 
form MEANING MEANS MEANING. 

So stated it may lose in force what it gains in 
clarity, but so stated it suggests that we may pass 
rapidly to the final chapter in which the celebrated 
psychologist sums up his ultimate theory of value, 
merely noting from the intervening pages such dicta as 
the following: 

"The will of Napoleon, if we want to understand it in its 
historical meaning, does not come to us as an object The act 
IS completely grasped when it is understood in the meaning of 
its attitude If Napoleon’s will is completely understood in its 
MEANING, there remains nothing to be understood by other 
inquiries " (p 144), 

which explains the meaning of History. 

"The world m its overpersonal meaning is absolutely 
valuable by the fact that the glow of happiness illuminates 
human souls ’’ (p 202), 

which explains the meaning of Happiness. 

"The real has its meaning in the expectation which it 
awakens," 

which explains the meaning of Reality. 

"The inner agreement of our desires finally gives to our life 
Its perfect meaning . . The tones to which our life gives 
MEANING express a will which asserts itself " (p 253), 

which explains the meaning both of Life and Music. 

Finally then we proceed to the message of the final 
chapter which deals with the values of Absoluteness. 
In this chapter, covering fortysix pages, the word 



THE MEANING OF MEANING 


172 

‘ meaning ’ occurs no less than fiftyeight times. As 
the climax approaches (“We now stand before a new 
ultimate value, the absolute of philosophy, the funda-
mentally absolute which bears all reality in itself,” p. 39), 
the keyword stands out in almost every sentence. 
At page 400 “we can already take a wide outlook.” 
If our will towards identification is satisfied “ it cannot 
have any possible meaning to ask further as to the 
value of the world." 

" Our whole experience now gains its unity, its rest, its final 
MEANING The MEANING Of the value enters into connection 

with the overexperience of the overself . Here for the last 
tune we might separate outerworld, fellowworld, and inner 
world, and examine for each realm how it enlarges its meaning 
in the relation to the overreality An inquiry into the 

' stuff ’ of the world can have a meaning only when there are 
sufficient stufis which can be discriminated When everything is 
equally will it cannot have any meaning to find out what this 
will really is . .To reach a goal means that the will maintains 
Its object in a new form . The meaning of the world is an 
aiming towards a greater abundance of aiming which yet remains 
identical with itself ... In the deed itself the notyet and the 
nolonger are one Their temporal, mutual relation gives unity 
and MEANING to the deed ” 

Ten pages later (p. 416) it is still going on : 

" Only when we view mankind in this metaphysical connection 
do we recognize the ultimate meaning of its inexhaustible activity 
. When the meaning of the social work towards values be-
comes metaphysically deepened, at the same time the counterwill 
which foolishly destroys values must be sliarpened in its contrast 
The worldwill which gives meaning to reality is a principle 
annulled by the conscious denial of values, suddenly everything 
has become meaningless Each of us is a member of man-

kind, and the meaning of our single self then lies m the part 
which we take in the upbuilding of the values. . We will 
indicate once more the purest meaning of our view of the world 
We have come to understand how the world and mankind and 
the self are embedded in the deed of the overself for eternity. 
For eternity 1 We have reached the highest point from which the 
MEANING of eternity unveils itself In the deed therefore 

past and future are one and that alone is the meaning of eternity 
. . . Every new stage realizes the ultimate meaning of the pre-
ceding stages But just that meant to us progress Deed 



THE MEANING OF PHILOSOPHERS 173 

MEANS fulfilment and completion. . . From here we understand 
the task and the meaning of our individual selfhood . . Our 
life has MEANING and purpose Banished is the anxiety that the 
overreality may be meaningless ... It would be meaning-
less to hope for more from life than such a fulfilment of the 
overwill. . . . The mere desire for pleasure cannot possibly be 
the goal of our life if it is to mamtain meaning and value at all 
... A mere skippmg and a mere sudden transition from one 
state to another would never have meaning. . . To unfold 

his own will means for every one to help the upbuildmg of the 
same common world.” 

And so, on the next page (430), the last of the book, 
we conclude with the assurance that “To progress in 
the sense of the selfassertion of the will in will 
enhancement remains for mankind, too, the ultimate 
MEANING of duty.” 

A study of these extracts in the German version of 
Miinsterberg’s work is an interesting exercise in com-
parative linguistic, and the contribution of the term 
‘ meaning ’ to the cogency of the argument is consider-
able. There may be those who find it hard to believe 
that any writer responsible for such a verbal exploit 
could also enjoy a reputation as a thinker of the first 
rank. There is, however, another ambitious modern 
attempt by an American theorist to deal specifically 
with the fundamentals of psychology; and in the 
preface to this work ^ we find a reference to Munster 
berg’s “illuminating work on the great problems of 
philosophy and of natural and mental science. . . . 
It may be truthfully said that in his death America has 
lost its one great theoretical psychologist.” Professor 
Moore has no occasion to quote largely from the par-
ticular work selected above, but his extracts (pp. 107 
I lo) from Munsterberg’s Psychology General and Applied^ 
and Psychotherapy are equally bespattered with the term. 
And as might be expected Professor Moore’s own 
treatment is also vitiated at its most crucial points by 
his too hospitable attitude to this plausible nomad. 

^ Tht Foundations of Psychology, by Jared Sparks Moore, 1921. 



174 


THE MEANING OF MEANING 


To understand the nature of psychology as a science 
we must, he holds, carefully distinguish Science from 
Metaphysics, and “the keyword of the problem of 
metaphysics is Interpretation. To interpret anything is 
to determine its meaning. If the fundamental pre-
supposition of all science is that every fact has a cause ; 
the fundamental presupposition of metaphysics is that 
every fact has a meaning” (p. 97). In other words, in 
philosophy as opposed to science, ‘ ‘ each fact is treated 
not as the effect of some antecedent cause, but as the 
expression of a Meaning.” Science must precede 
metaphysics“ We cannot know what facts mean until 
we know what the facts are, we cannot interpret the 
facts until we have described them,” 

But, objects the critic (p. 100), “is it not true that 
the very essence of a mental process is its meaning?” 
No. Titchener has given six good reasons why mental 
processes are “not intrinsically meaningful” (p. loi). 
But, the critic insists (p. 102), Do not all our experiences 
“ in their inmost nature mean something. Do we ever 
experience a ‘meaningless’ sensation?” We have 
no reason, the reply runs, to believe that the mind 
“began with meaningless sensations, and progressed 
to meaningful perceptions. On the contrary we must 
suppose that the mind was meaningful from the very 
outset.” 

And here we pause at the very pertinent question : 
“ What then from the psychological point of view is 
this MEANING?” The answer is given without hesita-
tion and in italics“ From the psychological point of 
view, MEANING IS context." To explain: In every per-
ception, or group of sensations and images, “the 
associated images form as it were a context or ‘ fringe ’ 
which binds together the whole and gives it a definite 
MEANING,” and it is this “fringe of meaning that 
makes the sensations not ‘ mere ’ sensations but 
symbols of a physical object.” So when we see an 
orange it is the contextual images of smell and taste 



THE MEANING OF PHILOSOPHERS 175 

“which enable us to ‘recognize’ the object i.e., give 
a MEANING to the sensations ” of colour and brightness. 
Similarly (p, 103) “every idea has a core or nucleus of 
images, and a fringe of associated images . . . which 
give MEANING to the nuclear images.” 

To sum up: 

“ In all these cases, the meaning of the perception 
or idea is ‘ carried ’ by the contextual images or sensa-
tions, and it is context which gives meaning to every 
experience, and yet it would be inaccurate to say that 
the MEANING of a sensation or symbolic image is 
through and through nothing but its associated images 
or sensations, for this would be a violation of the 
principle that psychology is not concerned with 
MEANINGS. All that is implied is that the meanings of 
our experiences are represented in the realm of mental 
processes by ‘ the fringe of related processes that 
gathers about the central group 'of sensations or 
images.’ Psychologically meaning is context, but 
logically and metaphysically meaning is much more 
than psychological context; or, to put it the other way 
round, whatever meaning may be, psychology is 
concerned with it only so far as it can be represented 
in terms of contextual imagery ” (p. 103). 

It is a curious approach to the problems of sign 
interpretation,‘this account of Meaning which (psycho-
logically) ts context, which is earned by context, which 
is much more than context, which is expressed by facts, 
with which psychology ts not concerned and yet ts con-
cerned, so far as it can be represented by contextual 
imagery. 1 

* In a letter pnnted by Mind (April 1924), but unfortunately marred 
by four lapsus calami (' nuclear image' for nuclear images, ' 102 ’ for 
103. ' 193 'Jor 293. and ' 541 ’ for 544) Professor Moore, after drawing 
attention to three typist’s errors in the above (now corrected) complains 
that this paragraph " makes chaos of my whole position by ridiculing 
my account ” of Meamng Says he " My whole point is that Meaning 
IS ‘ much more than context ’ though ‘ carried ’ or ' represented ' in 
the mind by context, and that for this reason, ‘ psychology is not 
concerned with Meamng, but only with its representatives in the mind ’ " 
lie adds " I nowhere say that Meaning ‘ is context,' or that psychology 



176 THE MEANING OF MEANING 

But there are stranger things to follow, for here 
True Meaning makes its appearancein connection 
with a bell. “The true meaning of the percept of the 
bell is its reference to the real objective bell,” and this 
reference is represented in the mind by contextual 
images which “constitute its meaning ‘ translated into 
the language of’ psychology. So the true meaning of 
an idea lies in its logical reference to an objective 
system of ideas” (p. 104); and a little later (p. in) we 
find that “all experiences are expressions of the inner 
MEANINGS of the self.” 

It is hard to believe that Professor Moore would 
have been satisfied with such a vocabulary had he 
attempted to investigate the psychology of signs and 
symbols ; and this investigation could not but have 
shown him how much of his present work had its 
origin in an unfortunate choice of, and attitude towards, 
symbols. As it is, the constant appeal to an esoteric 
Doctrine of Meaning is reminiscent of the dialectical 
devices of mediaeval theologians, and we may conclude 
by noting that the Doctrine is specifically invoked in 
relation to Religion. 

Psychology may discuss as freely the mental processes m 
volved m religious expenence as it does those concerned m our 
experience of physical thmgs, but m neither ceise can its decisions 
affect the question of the meaning of those experiences. 
The question of the nature of the processes undergone by the 
human mind in any spheres of activity is a question of fact, 
caUmg for analytical description and explanation m cansal terms: 
the problem of the vahdity or truthvalue of these processes is a 
question of meaning, callmg for mteipretation " (p 122). 

For those who regard interpretation as a purely 
causal process, and consider that when the meaning of 
anything is interpreted it is but explained in causal 
terms (while at the same time recognizing a totally 

' IS concerned * with Meaning itself " Out whole point is that Professor 
Moore constantly shifts his uses of meaning without elucidating any 
of them We were not concerned to discuss his view but to exhibit his 
linguistic techmque, and we are glad to notice that the sentences quoted 
from his letter supplement the exhibit 



THE MEANING OF PHILOSOPHERS 177 

distinct sense of meaning in which the ‘meaning’ of a 
poem or a religion would be the emotion or attitude 
evoked through it), the extent to which this symbol 
can change places with its other selves should provide 
material for reflection. 

Our object here, however, is rather to provide 
instances of its use in current constructive and contro-
versial literature, and it remains only to group together 
a few further typical examples. 

“Strictly,” says Professor Broad, “a thing has 
MEANING when acquaintance with or knowledge about 
it either enables one to infer or causes one by associa-
tion to think of something else.”^ But so ‘strict’an 
account has not always found favour with philosophical 
writers. “We may, for convenience sake,” explains 
Professor Nettleship,* “mentally hold apart a certain 
fraction of the fact, for instance, the minimum of 
MEANING which justifies us in using the word triangu-
larity”while Lord Haldane* can write, “The per-
cipient is an object in his universe, but it is still the 
universe including himself that there is for him, and 
for its MEANING it implies the presence of mind.” And 
here are some of the propositions advanced by so 
influential a thinker as Professor Royce ; * 

“The melody sung, the artist’s idea, the thought of your 
absent fnends all these not merely have their obvious internal 
MEANING as meetmg a conscions purpose by their very presence, 
but also they at least appear to have that other sort of meaning, 

‘ Perception, Physics and Reality, 1914. p 97 In reviewing J EUis 
McTaggart's " The Nature of Existence ’’ m The Hibbert Journal 
(1921, p 173) Dr Broad notes that " McTaggart seems to have taken 
over without question from Russell's Principles of Mathematics, the 
doctrine that an mfimte regress is vicious when, and only when, it 
concerns the ‘ meaning ' 01 some concept " According to Rus^l 
(Mind, 1920, p 401), " MEANING IS an observable property of observable 
entities " Professor John Laird goes further than this, and in his 
opimon “ MEANING is directly perceptible just like sound and colour. 

. Continuants are conveyed to us through the intrinsic meaning 
of what we perceive mtermittently. . . The meaning directly 

perceived m the filling of space and time has the seeds of causahty 
in it " (A Study of Realism, pp 27, 29, 98 ) 

’ R L Nettleship, Philosophical Remains, I , p 220. 

* The Reign of Relativity, 1921, p 181 

* The World and the Individual, pp 36, 176 



178 THE MEANING OF MEANING 

that reference beyond themselves to objects . . This external 
MEANING, I say, appears to be very different from the mtemal 
MEANING, and wholly to transcend the latter 

"Just what the mtemal meaning of an idea already imperfectly 
but consciously is, namely, purpose relatively fulfilled, just that 
and nothing else the apparently external meaning when tmly 
comprehended also proves to be, namely, the entire expression of 
the very Will that is fragmentarily embodied m the hie of the 
flying conscious idea To be means simply to express to 

embody the complete internal meaning of a certam absolute 
system of ideas, a system, moreover, which is genuinely implied 
m the true internal meaning of every finite idea, however 
fragmentary 

" The mystic knows only Internal meanings, precisely as the 
realist considers only External meanings " 

“We have direct acquaintance with the ideas or 
MEANINGS about which we have thoughts and which 
we may be said to understand" declared the late Lord 
Keynes ; and again, “ We are able to pass from direct 
acquaintance with things to a knowledge of proposi-
tions about the things of which we have sensations 
or understand the meaning.”* So helpful a term is 
equally in demand as a carminative in ecclesiastical 
controversy,^ as a vade mecum in musical criticism,’ 
as an indication of the precise point where doctors 
differ,* and as a lubricant for the spinningwheel of 
the absolute relativist.* “If education cannot be 

I J M Keynes, A Treahse on Prohahxhty, Part 1 ., Fundamental 
Ideas, pp 12, 13 

* " This House recognizes the gam which arises from inquiry into 
the MEANING and expression of the Failli."^Ibe Upper House of 
Convocation, May and, 1922 

* " Miss A's programme last mght became stimulating in virtue 
of the abounding health and freshness of her outlook, conveyed through 
an admirable techmque Probably Beethoven's Sonata in A, Op loi, 
will reveal a deeper meaning to her m full maturity, but her present 
readingwas eloquently truthful "The Morning Post, June 24th, 1922 

* ■' The importance of symptoms is so imperfectly realized that 
a description of the meaning, mechanism and sigmficance of symptoms 
IS nowhere to be found, and this constitutes a great defect in medical 
knowledge "Sir James Mackenzie, op cit, p 2 

» " The concrete umveisal means that reality in the lull meaning 
of the word is of the nature of the concept Umversolity means 

that the whole is present in every part . . If theie be nothing 
absolute in our objective universe, it follows that the absolute is within 
us It IS not within, however, in any abstract meaning, any meaning 
which would isolate the subject of experience from Its object . . Also 



THE MEANING OF PHILOSOPHERS 179 

identified with mere instruction, what is it? What 
does the term mean?” asks the educationist. “I 
answer, it must mean a gradual adjustment to the 
spiritual possession of the race.”' Meaning is there-
fore just the sort of word with which we may attempt 
to probe the obscure depths of the souls of fishes. 
“ Let us fix attention on the state of the mind of tbt 
goldfish. . . . Suddenly comes a new element Into 
consciousnessthe conscious counterpart of the stimuli 
of the eye caused by the bread falling into the water. . . . 
The food is an object in space and time for the fish and 
has its MEANING, but when the food is eaten both per-
cept and MEANING disappear. . . , This is an instance 
of percept and meaning tied.”* 

Turning now to official Psychology, we have six 
current Professorial utterances which invite com-
parison : 

"The Object of simple apprehension is whatever the mmd 
MEANS or mtends to refer to 

" The sight of the word sugar means its sweetness. 

" The only general word which is at all appropriate for express-
ing this kmd of consciousness is the word meaning " > 

" All that is mtended is never given m the mental state The 
mental content merely means what we are thmkmg about; it 
does not reproduce it or constitute it " * 

" Perceptions have meaning No sensation means, a sensa-
tion simply goes on in various attributive ways, mtensely, 
clearly, spatially, and so forth. All perceptions mean they go 
on, also, m various attnbutive ways, but they go on mean-
ingly." "An idea means another idea, is psj^ologically the 
MEANING of that other idea, if it is that idea’s context." ‘ 

"The afiectivevohtional meaning, or worth, of an object 
becomes explicit only on the cognitive level It is the actualiza-
tion of the dispositional tendency, either in feeling or desire, 

there is preestablished harmony of the monads, if we impart to this new 
term the old meaning "H Wildon Carr, A Theory of Monads 
(1922) pp 299100 jiS 

^ Nicholas Murray Butler, What ts Education ? (1906), p 17. 

* W E Urwick, The Child's Mtnd (1907), p 68 

’ Stout, Manual of Psychology, pp 104, 180, 183. 

* PiUsbury, Fundamentals of Psychology, p 269 

‘ Titchener, A Textbook of Psychology, p 367, and Experimental 
Psychology of the ThoughtProcesses p 175 



i8o THE MEANING OF MEANING 

through these cognitive acts, which gives to the feeling or desue 
that MEANING described as worth , . . What are the possible 
MEANINGS of reahty as employed m reflective valuation, or what 
IS the common logical cue of all these meanings ’’’ 

" Meaning may be something meant, or it may bewell, ]ust 
MEANING. . . If, then, MEANING, in my mterpretation, is jnst 

part of a process itself, why does it so persistently elude onr most 
patient search for it among the jnxtaposed or compounded 
products of mental process ? 

" Meaning is the essential part of a thought or a conscions 
ness of an object . meaning has no immediate physiological 
correlate m the biam that could serve as its substitute and dis-
charge its functions."^ 

As a specimen of the language of Psychoanalysts, 
on the other hand, the following by the late Professor 
J. J. Putnam ‘ of Harvard may be considered: 

" It seems, and is, a small matter to walk in the country 
without One's coat, but a similar msufficiency of costume, if 
occumng m a dream, may be a circumstance of far wider mean-
ing. . . It will be obvious from the foregomg that the term 

‘ sexual' as defined in the pisychoanalytic vocabulary, is of far 
wider meaning than is ordinarily conceived . . The next pomt 
has reference to * sublimation' This ontcome of mdrvidnal 
evolution, as defined by Freud, has a stnctly social meaning 

The logical end of a psychoanalytic treatment is the re-
covery of a full sense of the bearings and meanings of one’s life. 

A man’s sense of pnde of his family may be a symptom of 
narcistic selfadulation, but like all other signs and symbols, 
this IS a case where two opposing meanings meet ’. . ." 

The Pragmatists made a bold attempt to simplify 
the issue. “ That which is suggested is meaning,” 
wrote Professor Miller,* and Professor Bawden * is 
equally simple“ Feeling is the vague appreciation 
of the value of a situation, while cognition is a clear 
and distinct perception of its meaning.” The trouble 
begins, however, with the first attempts at elaboration. 

^ Urban, Valuation, pp 95, 387. 

* Lloyd Morgan, Instinct and Experience, pp itj, 278, 

* W McDougall, Body and Mind, pp. 304, 311 

* Addresses on Psychoanalysts, 1921, pp. 146, 151, 306. 

* I Miller, The Psychology of Thinking, 1909, p 154 

* H Heath Bawden, The Principles of Pragmatism, p. 131. 



THE MEANING OF PHILOSOPHERS i8i 

“An experience is cogntiional," says Professor Dewey* 
“which is contemporaneously aware of meaning some-
thing beyond itself. Both the meaning and the thing 
MEANT are elements in the same situation. . . . One 
is present as notpresentinthesamewayinwhichthe 
otheris. ... We may say that the smell of a rose, 
when involving conscious meaning or intention, is 
mental.” 

Historians, of philosophy* and childhood,® Re-
formers, social * and grammatical,*all have their own 
uses of the word, obvious yet undefined. Even the 
clearest thinkers refrain from further analysis. Through-
out Professor G. E. Moore’s writings ‘ meaning ’ 
plays a conspicuous part, and in Pnnctpta Ethtca we 
may read. 

" Onr question ‘ What is good >' may have still another 
MEANING We may, m the third place, mean to ask not what 
thmg or things are good, but how ' good ' is to be defined. . . . 
That which is meant by ‘ good' is, in fact, except its converse 

^ J Dewey, The Influence of Darwin upon Philosophy, 1910, pp 88, 
104 

* " Ideas, we may say generally, are symbols, as serving to express 
some actuail moment or phase of expenence and guiding towards 
fuller actualization of what is, or seems to be, involved in its existence 
or MEANING . That no idea is ever wholly adequate means that 
the suggestiveness of expenence is inexhaustible " Forsyth, English 
Philosophy, 1910, pp 180, 183 

’ " Babies leatn to speak words partly by adopting sounds of their 
own and giving them a meaning, partly by pure mutation . . 
Whether the b^y invents both sounds and meaning seems doubtful 
Certainly they change the meaning of words " E. L Cabot, 
Seven Ages of Childhood, 1921, pp 22, 23, 24 

* " The MEANING of Mamage I How really simple it is for you 

and me to ascertain its precise meaning, and yet what desperate 
and disappointing efforts have been made to discover it . .If 
our children knew all about them they would yet have missed the 
essential meaning of human mamage A knowledge of life outside 
humamty would not enlighten us as to what marriage meant for men 
and women Manifestly, if we desire to know the meaning 

of mamage, we ought to search out homes where the conditions are 
favourable We may ungrudgingly pay a welldeserved tribute to 

the mother cat Motherhood means already much in the ammal 
world I " G Spiller, The Meaning of Mamage, 1914, pp 13 

° Strictly speaking, the image is often both a part of the meaning 
and a symbol of the rest of it As part it gives one of the meaning's 
details Part of the meaning of an idea is its fixed reference to some 
objective identity Meaning alone passes between mind and 

mind A D Sheffield, Grammar and Thinking, pp. 34 



I82 THE MEANING OF MEANING 

‘bad,’ the only simple object of thought which is peculiar to 
Ethics. 

It would be absolutely meaningless to say that oranges 
were yellow, unless yellow did in the end mean just ‘ yellow ’ . . ■ 
We should not get very far with our science if we were bound to 
hold that everything which was yellow meant exactly the same 
thmg as yellow 

In general, however, ethical philosophers have attempted to 
define good without recognizmg what such an attempt must 
mean." 1 

Nor is it only in Ethics that important philosophical 
positions are based on this arbitrary foundation. 
“ Things, as we know, are largely constructions,” says 
one modern metaphysician*“a synthesis of sense 
elements and meanings. . . . The concept is no mere 
word, because it has meaning. ... A universal, as 
the object of a meaning, is not a mental act.” It is 
impossible, urges another,* who also speaks of “ analys-
ing the MEANING of a process of change from a con-
ceptual point of view,” to imagine “that we ourselves 
can be analysed into sensedata, for sensedata are 
‘ given ’ or ‘ presented ’ by the very meaning of the 
term.” And again, “It is doubtless true that ‘body’ 
and ‘ mind ’ are used with more than one meaning to 
which a reasonable significance may be attached.”* 
Meanings to which significance is attached have also 
the authority of Lotze,* who held that “ historical 
persons and events, in spite of all the significance 
attached to their meaning, are often very insignificant 

I Pp 5 , 14. IS 

We may compare Professor Perry's method of approach . 

“ What can the realization of goodness mean if not that what is 
natural and necessary, actual and real shall also be good ? 

" If it be essential to the meaning of P^osophy that it should issue 
from life, it is equally essential that it should return to life But 
this connection of philosophy with life does not mean its reduction 
to the terms of life as conceived in the marketplace 

“ The present age is made insensible to the meaning of life through 
preoccupation with its very achievements" R B. Perry, The 
Approach to Philosophy, pp 422, 426, 427 

• D H. Parker, The Self and Nature, 1917, pp. 158, 190 

• C A Richardson, Spiritual Pluralism, 1920, pp 10, 40. 

• Ibid, p. 184 

® Outlines of Xslhetics, m the English translation by Professor 
G. T Ladd of Yale, p. 86. 



THE MEANING OF PHILOSOPHERS 183 

in the external form of their appearance,” and who 
also informs us that in Moorish architecture “ the 
soaring pointed bow of horseshoe shape has no 
properly constructive meaning, but rather recalls the 
mighty opening of a cleft” (p. 66), while a landscape 
in pictorial composition “ has a meaning only as a part 
of the actual world ” (p. 82). 

Esthetics, however, has always flourished on loose 
usage, and nonphilosophic writers have here been 
more than usually persistent in their invocation of the 
word at all critical points. “Colour as colour,” writes 
Van Gogh, “ means something; this should not be 
ignored, but rather turned to account.”* The poet, too, 
we read, “ said what he meant, but his meaning seems 
to beckon away beyond itself, or rather to expand into 
something boundless which is only focussed in it.”* 

And so on in a crescendo of reiteration as the 
emotions of the cosmologist soar through the 
Empyrean : 

" Thought transformed the whole status of life and gave a 
new MEANING to reahty Our age is great in opportunity to 

those who would wrest from life a meaning and a value " ^ 

"All reasoning as to the meaning of life leads us back to the 
mstmcts As soon as we deny sensation any other signifi-

cance beyond that which belongs to it as a regulator of activity, 
the various values of life that have been promulgated since the 
dawn of civilization become quite meaningless."* 

"Just as the artist finds his own meaning in the successful 
struggle to express it, so, from our point of view, God realizes 
His own intention m the process of effecting it . .In the 
world, novelty is part of its meaning, and this is particularly 
true of an experience such as we found the Divme experience 
must be, where the Future is the dominant element of Time,”* 

" God IS both fact and ideal, not merely in the common way 
of a value attaching to a fact or truth, as utility attaches to my 
inkstand, but in the peculiar way in which a meaning attaches 

* Letters of a PostImpressionist, p 29 

* A C Bradley, Oxford Lectures on Poetry, 1901, p 26 

* R Eucken, The Meaning and Value of Life, 1909, pp 38, 147 

* I Harris, The Significance of Existence, 1911, p 319 

* W Temple, The Nature of Personality, 1911, p 107 



i84 the meaning OF MEANING 

to that which symbolizes it . . The objective symbol or 
emblem is attributed or assigned to this meaning, to represent it 
vicariously . 

"Reality m the last analysis is what we mean by reality. 
Reality apart from all meaning for experience is an absurdity 
or a mere word 

"The actudl side of every moment of consciousness only 
possesses value or meaning as a token of the vast potentiality 
beyond itself . . 

"Cosmological theones of worldprocess often halt and be-
come MEANINGLESS through a refusal to introduce the notion of 
infinity ” * 

" In order to have a clearer view of these consequences, we 
should consider the scope of these meanings more clearly, ex-
amine whether they can, like the meanings of words, be taken 
away . As by the meaning of a word I know, or as it were 
see, into another man's thought, so by the meaning of my spirit 
I see into that Bemg which I call God ... By God is meant 
an Eternal or Infimte Spirit" * 

J M Baldwin, Genetic Theory of Reality, 1915, pp 108, 227 

* E Belfort Bax, The Real, the Rational, and the Alogical, 1920, 
pp 233 , ®43 

* Professor K. J. Spaldmg, Desire and Reason, 1922, p. 8. 
