in order:: Summary, Rebuttals, Chapter Text

The Nature of Truth
Truth is a property of statements.
A statement is true if it corresponds to reality.
A statement is false if it does not correspond to reality.
Theories of Truth
The correspondence theory of truth says that the truth of a statement is its correspondence to reality.
The coherence theory of truth says that the truth of a statement is its coherence with other statements.
The pragmatic theory of truth says that the truth of a statement is its usefulness.
The Problems of Truth
There are some problems with the correspondence theory of truth.
How do we know what reality is?
How do we know if a statement corresponds to reality?
There are some problems with the coherence theory of truth.
How do we know if a set of statements is coherent?
What if there are two sets of statements that are both coherent, but contradict each other?
There are some problems with the pragmatic theory of truth.
How do we know if a statement is useful?
What if a statement is useful, but not true?
The chapter concludes by arguing that the correspondence theory of truth is the most satisfactory theory of truth. However, it also acknowledges that the theory has some limitations.

Here are some additional points from the chapter:

The truth of a statement is independent of the speaker's belief in the statement.
The truth of a statement is also independent of the speaker's emotions or intentions.
The truth of a statement is not affected by the passage of time.
The chapter argues that the truth of a statement is a property of the statement itself, and is not dependent on anything else.



Rebuttals

Sure, here are a few rebuttals to the chapter on truth in The Meaning of Meaning:

The correspondence theory of truth is too simplistic. The correspondence theory of truth says that a statement is true if it corresponds to reality. However, what does it mean for a statement to correspond to reality? How do we know what reality is? How do we know if a statement corresponds to reality? These are all difficult questions that the correspondence theory of truth does not adequately answer.
The coherence theory of truth is too circular. The coherence theory of truth says that a statement is true if it coheres with other statements. However, how do we know if a set of statements coheres? We can only know if a set of statements coheres if we already know that the statements are true. This means that the coherence theory of truth is circular.
The pragmatic theory of truth is too subjective. The pragmatic theory of truth says that a statement is true if it is useful. However, what does it mean for a statement to be useful? How do we know if a statement is useful? These are all difficult questions that the pragmatic theory of truth does not adequately answer. Additionally, the pragmatic theory of truth seems to imply that a statement can be true even if it is not factually accurate. This is a counterintuitive and troubling implication.
These are just a few of the rebuttals that have been raised against the theories of truth discussed in Chapter VI of The Meaning of Meaning. These theories are not without their problems, and it is important to be aware of these problems when considering them.

In addition to these rebuttals, it is also worth noting that there are other theories of truth that have been proposed. These theories include the deflationary theory of truth, the prosentential theory of truth, and the redundancy theory of truth. These theories offer different ways of understanding truth, and it is worth considering them as well.




CHAPTER VI 


THE THEORY OF DEFINITION 

The first cause of absurd conclusions I ascribe to 
the want of method ; in that they begin not their 
ratiocination from defimtions — Hobbes. 

" Do, as a concession to my poor wits, hard 
Darlington, )ust explain to me what you really 
mean ”—" I think I had better not. Duchess. 
Nowadays to be intelligible is to be found out "— 

Lady Windermere's Fan. 

There is at present no theory of Definition capable 
of practical application under normal circumstances. 
The traditional theory, in so far as it has not been lost 
in the barren subtleties of Genus and Differentia, and in 
the confusion due to the term ‘ Connotation,’ has made 
little progress — chiefly on account of the barbarous 
superstitions ^ about language which have gathered on 

* The Magic of Names is often potent where we should least expect 
it, and the distress of Sachs on the discovery of Uranus, which found 
expression in hi^ query—" What guarantee have we that the planet 
regarded by astronomers as Uranus is really Uranus ^ "—is onfy one 
degree more primitive than Herbert Spencer's contention that " By 
comparing its meamngs in different connections, and observing what 
they have in common, we learn the essential meaning of a word , let 
us thus ascertain the meaning of the words ‘ good,' " etc 

The italics are ours, and no one who does not believe with Nansen's 
Greenland Eskimos " that there is a spiritual affinity between two 
people of the same name," can fail to see the futility of such attempts 
to define by Essence The doctrine derives from the view already 
referred to that words are in some way parts of things (a charge which 
Spencer himself, curiously enough, brings elsewhere against Greek 
speculation in general) If, as was supposed everything has its proper 
name, the existence of a name enables us to look with confidence for 
the thing or ‘ idea ' to which it belongs, and, m general, things possessing 
the same name will have something in common which the process of 
definition must endeavour to find. The search for the quiddity of 
things, the hacceitas, as Duns Scotus called it, probably has its origin 
in the same attitude to Words, though it is unfair to attribute to Aristotle 
the linguistic absurdities of his followers Some of the most curious 
implications of these traditions, both in the history of philosophy 

lOS 



no THE MEANING OF MEANING 

the confines of logic from the earliest times. Four 
difficulties have stood in the way and must first be 
removed. 

Firstly, do we define things or words? To decide 
this point we have only to notice that if we speak about 
defining words we refer to something very different from 
what IS referred to, meant, by ‘ defining things.’ When 
we define words we take another set of words which may 
be used with the same referent as the first, i.e., we sub¬ 
stitute a symbol which will be better understood in a 
given situation. With things, on the other hand, no 
such substitution is involved. A so-called definition of 
a horse as opposed to the definition of the word ‘ horse,’ 
is a statement about it enumerating properties by means 
of which it may be compared with and distinguished 
from other things. There is thus no rivalry between 
‘ verbal ’ and ‘ real ’ definitions.* 

The words by means of which these properties are 
enumerated do, of course, give us a substitute symbol— 
either a complete analysis, or as abbreviated by classi- 
ficatory methods (the usual ‘ genus and differentia ’ type) 
—with the same referent (the horses) as the original 
symbol ; but rather by way of corollary than as the 
main purpose of the analysis. Moreover, this process 
is only possible with complex objects which have been 
long studied by some science. With simple objects, or 
those which for lack of investigation are not known to 
be analysable, as well as with everything to which 
classificatory methods have not yet been applied, such 
a method is clearly not available, and here other symbols 
must be found as the substitutes which symbol-definition 
seeks to provide. Such, in outline, is the solution of 
the long-standing dispute between the advocates of real 
and symbolic definitions. 

and m the most recent develraments of logic, are admirably treated 
by Professor L Rougier in his Paralogtsmes du Jiattonahsme, pp 146 S., 
368 fi , 386 fi 

* See Leibmtz, New Essays concerning Human Understanding, 1916, 
pp 316-7, for an example of the way in which the distinction b^n 
envisaged 



THE THEORY OF DEFINITION 


III 


The second difficulty is closely related to the above. 
Though definition be symbol-substitution, definitions 
have usually, for grammatical reasons, to be stated in 
a form which makes them appear to be about things. 
This is because we are in the habit of abbreviating such 
symbols as "the word ‘ fire’ refers to the same referent 
as the words ‘what burns’” to " fire is what burns” ; 
and of saying “ Chten means ‘ dog,’” when we ought to 
say " the word chten and the word ‘dog’ both mean the 
same animal.”^ 

Thirdly, all definitions are essentially ad hoc. They 
are relevant to some purpose or situation, and con¬ 
sequently are applicable only over a restricted field or 
‘universe of discourse.’ For some definitions, those of 
physics, for instance, this universe is very wide. Thus 
for the physicist ‘ energy' is a wider term than for the 
schoolmaster, since the pupil whose report is marked 
"without energy” is known to the physicist as possessing 
it in a variety of forms. Whenever a term is thus taken 
outside the universe of discourse for which it has been 
defined, it becomes a metaphor, and may be in need 
of fresh definition. Though there is more in metaphor 
than this, we have here an essential feature of symbolic 
metaphorical language. The distinction between this 
and emotive metaphorical language is discussed later at 
pages 239-40. 

Fourthly there is the problem of ‘intensive’ as 
opposed to ‘ extensive ’ definition which comes to a head 
with the use of the terms ‘denote’and ‘connote.’ In 
Chapter IX. the artificiality of these distinctions will be 
urged. Here it is only necessary to point out that two 
symbols may be said to have the same connotation when 

* It may be noted that when we say *' Fire burns ’’ we appear to 
be conveying information about fire and not about symbols, whereas 
with such a combination of synonyms as " Chten is ‘ dog ’ " we seem 
unable to advance the knowledge of anyone This is because in saying 
" Fire burns," ‘ fire ’ and ‘ burns ’ are used with differing definitions 
If we defined chten as " domestic wolf-like animal ” and ‘ dog ’ as 
" barking quadruped " we could say " Chten is ' dog' " (=" Dogs 
bark ”), winch would convey information 



II 2 


THE MEANING OF MEANING 


they symbolize the same reference. An intensive or 
connotative definition will be one which involves no 
change in those characters of a referent in virtue of 
which It forms a context with its original sign. In an 
extensive definition there may be such change. In other 
words when we define intensively we keep to the same 
sign-situation for definiendum and definiens, when we 
define extensively this may be changed. 

We are now in a position to grapple with the 
difference between definitions and ordinary assertions. 
“Gorillas are animals” and “Gorillas are affable’’are 
unlike one another in the respect that the first appears 
to be certainly true as soon as we understand it, while 
the'second may be doubted. From “ This is a gorilla” 
it follows directly that “This is an animal,” but not 
that it is an affable one. If we look for a distinction in 
essential connection between animality and gorillarity 
on the one hand, and gorillarity and affability on the 
other we shall make but indifferent use of our leisure. 
But if the difference be sought in its proper place, that 
is, between or in^ the references, it will be found that 
the definition actually used in the first case includes 
animal, so that in speaking of a gorilla we have spoken 
of an animal, and are therefore able to refer again with¬ 
out diffidence to what we have already referred to ; while 
affability was not so included. The relevant definition, 
in fact, is the one actually used.® 

^ As a typical bogus question we might ask Where does difference 
Reside ’ 

* This point has its bearing upon the controversy as to whether 
relations, all or some, are internal or external An Internal relation 
would seem to be a defining relation, and any relation used as such 
to be internal ‘ Internal ’ and ‘ defining ’ are thus synonyms, e g , 
the relation of whole to part, since a whole is automatically defined 
as containing its parts, is internal, and similarly if a part be defined 
as contained iii a whole, the relation of part to whole An External 
relation is any relation other than a defining relation If Prof G E. 
Moore's relation ‘ entails ' (Phtlosophtcal Studies, p 291) were a relation 
of substitution, partial or complete, between symbols, based upon 
identity of reference, then this account of internal relations would 
not differ greatly from that given by Prof Moore It is, however, 
exceptionally difficult to discover what the several parties to this 
controversy are asserting , and indeed each is apt to lament his inability 
to understand the others 



THE THEORY OF DEFINITION 


113 

To attempt now a fresh attack upon the essential 
problem of how we define, or attain the substitute 
symbols required in any discussion. We know* that 
‘ A symbol refers to what it has actually been used to 
refer to.’ We shall cease then to assume that people are 
referring to what they ‘ought’ to have referred to, and 
consider only what they actually do refer to. The point 
to be met in every discussion is the point actually 
advanced, which must be first understood. We have, 
that is, in all cases to find the referent. How can this 
best be done ? 

The answer is simple and obvious. Find first, it 
runs, a set of referents which is certainly common to 
all concerned, about which agreement can be secured, 
and locate the required referent through its connection 
with these. 

It is fortunate that the types of fundamental con¬ 
nections with which discussions are concerned are few 
in number, though we are apt to believe, such is the 
multifarious complexity of our talk, that things are 
connected in any number of ways. Whether this 
poverty is due to the trammelling influence of language, 
a larger number of connections being quite, not merely 
partially, unmanageable by naive talkers, whether it 
is due to the structure of the brain, or whether it is due 
to an actual simplicity in the universe, need not here 
be considered. For practical purposes the fundamental 
connections which can be used in definition are limited 
to those which the normal mind can think of when 
directly named. Let us consider, for instance, the 
growth of the abstraction which we name a spatial 
relation. In all our references to spatial objects certain 
common elements or strands are active. Originally to 
think of space as opposed to spatial objects we had to 
think in rapid succession of a variety of spatial objects 
in order that the common elements in the references 
should stand out. In time we became able to use these 


^ By Canon IV.—Chapter V 



THE MEANING OF MEANING 


114 

common, i.e.^ general references independently without 
requiring them to be built up anew on each occasion. 
We are now able to use them merely upon the vicarious 
stimulus of the symbol ‘ spatial relation.’ A normal 
mind, however, except in the few cases in which such 
abstractions have universal value, still requires the aid 
of instances, analogies and metaphors. The fewness 
of these abstractions saves the linguistic situation. If 
we employed, say, a hundred radically different types 
of connections (still a small number) the task of limit¬ 
ing the misunderstandings due to the variety in our 
references would have proved impossible. 

The fundamental connections being thus so few, 
the task of a theory of definition narrows itself down to 
the framing of a list. All possible referents are con¬ 
nected in one or other, or several, of these fundamental 
ways with referents which we can all succeed in identify¬ 
ing. We must not assume in referring to any given 
fixed point of agreement from which we find we are 
able to start that we do more than agree in identifying 
this. We must be careful to introduce our starting- 
points in such a way that they do not raise fresh problems 
on their own account. That is to say, we must select 
them with reference to the particular universe of dis¬ 
course in which our definienda fall. Thus, if we wish 
to indicate what we are referring to when we use the 
word ‘ Beauty ’ we should proceed by picking out certain 
starting-points, such as nature, pleasure, emotion, or 
truth, and then saying that what we refer to by 
‘ Beauty’ is anything lying in a certain relation (imitating 
nature, causing pleasure or emotion, revealing truth) to 
these points. How this may be done is shown in detail 
in the following chapter. 

When someone asks where Cambridge Circus is, we 
say, “You know where the British Museum is, and 
you know the way down Shaftesbury Avenue. If you 
go down Shaftesbury Avenue you will come to it.” 
We may note— 



THE THEORY OF DEFINITION 115 

(1) The starting-point must be familiar, and this 
can in practice only be guaranteed when it is either 
something with which we are directly, not symbolically 
acquainted (we do not merely know its name), or some¬ 
thing with a wide and vague extension involving no 
ambiguity in the context in which it is used. Thus 
anyone in Kensington Gardens with a quarter of an 
hour to spare and a desire to view Cambridge Circus, 
if told that the said Circus is beyond Leicester Square, 
will postpone his visit as readily as if he were told 
(equally vaguely for another purpose) that it is in Soho. 

(2) For the stricter purposes we shall almost always 
require starting-points taken outside the speech situation; 
things, that is, which we can point to or experience. 
In this way we can utilize in our symbols the advantages 
of gesture languages mentioned above. Thus it is 
easier to point to an Antimacassar, when one of these 
safeguards is present, than to describe it. 

The importance of starting-points having thus been 
indicated, namely, to act as signs by which the required 
referents may be reached, we may now enumerate some 
of the main routes which are useful in finding our way 
about the field of reference. The sign-situations here 
involved, we must not forget, arise only through and 
upon many other simpler interpretations of the kind 
discussed in the preceding chapters. It is easy 
symbolically to make the situation which arises when 
we define appear simple, but if we realize the delicacy 
of the processes and adaptations required we shall not 
place overmuch trust in face-value comparisons of 
symbols (the usual method), but will attempt instead 
to consider what actually is happening. 

When in a discussion we are asked, ‘ Can you 
define your terms ? ’ or complain ‘ I do not understand 
what you mean by the words you use,’ we endeavour 
to discover some route by which understanding, i.e,^ 
identification of referents, may be secured. 

A person thoroughly acquainted with his subject 



ii6 THE MEANING OF MEANING 

and with the technique of Definition should be able, 
like the man up aloft in a maze, to direct travellers 
from all quarters to any desired point; and it may be 
added that to go up the ladder and overlook the maze 
is by far the best method of mastering a subject. 

Although in no case, as we have already seen, are 
relations to be regarded as part of the stuff of nature, 
and although when we appear to speak of them we are 
merely using them as tools, which does not involve 
actual referents corresponding to them, yet when they 
are so used there are various distinctions which it is 
desirable to make as a matter of convenience. At the 
beginning of our inquiry we described the relation 
which could be said to hold between symbol and 
referent as an imputed relation. To have described it 
simply as an indirect relation would have omitted the 
important difference between indirect relations recog¬ 
nized as such, and those wrongly treated as direct. 
Thus the relation between grandfather and grandson 
is much more indirect than that between father and son, 
and can be analysed into two paternal relations—‘ being 
the father of the father (or mother) of.’ Few people 
would suppose that a direct relation was here involved, 
since all family relations are highly indirect. But love, 
hate, friendship, sympathy, etc., are very commonly 
spoken of and regarded as direct, though on examina¬ 
tion their indirectness is at once discovered. The whole 
of social psychology is, however, infested with imputed 
relations of this type, for an explanation of which such 
hypotheses as that of group-consciousness are often 
invoked 

The distinction between simple and complex rela¬ 
tions on the other hand is somewhat different. In¬ 
directness is only one kind of complexity, and direct 
relations need not be simple. For instance, the relation 
of ‘ being a benevolent uncle to ’ is complex; it is a 
blend of the two relations ‘well disposed towards’ 
and ‘ avuncularity.’ The similarity between one pea 



THE THEORY OF DEFINITION 117 

and another is complex, being a blend of similarities 
in respect of greenness, hardness, edibility, etc. These 
considerations, elementary though they may appear, 
are of use whenever we have to treat of relations. 

The routes, then, which we seek in our endeavour 
to reach a desired referent are the obvious relations 
in which that referent stands to some known referent. 
The number of possible relations is indefinitely large, 
but those which are of practical use fortunately fall, 
as we have already explained, into a small number of 
groups. So that as a prehminary classification* we get 
such a list as this :— 

I. Symbolization 

This is the simplest, most fundamental way of 
defining. If we are asked what ‘orange’ refers to, 
we may take some object which is orange and say 
“ ‘ Orange’ is a symbol which stands for This.” Here 
the relation which we use in defining is the relation 
discussed in Chapter I. as constituting the base of our 
triangle. It is, as we mentioned, an imputed relation 
reducible to a relation between symbol and act of 
reference and a relation between act of reference and 
referent. Our starting-point is the word ‘ orange,’ 
our route of identification is this relation. The required 
referent is This. What wq are doing in fact here is 
directly naming. 

But, it will be said. This merely tells us that 
‘orange’ is applicable in one case; what we wish to 
know is how it is applicable in general; we wish to 
have the definition extended so as to cover ail the 
referents for which ‘orange’ is a suitable symbol. 
This generalization may be performed for all types 
of definitions in the same manner by the use of 
similarity relations. We may say “ ‘Orange’ applies 
to this and to all things similar in respect of colour to 
this.” In practice the discrimination of one similarity 
relation from others generally requires the use of 

’ Cf. further Ptyehe, V<4 X, No 3, Januarv, 1930. pp 9 and 29 



ii8 THE MEANING OF MEANING 

parallel instances, analogies in fact, of the simplest 
order. 

2. Similarity 

Thus similarity itself may be used as a defining 
relation. Our required referent is a chosen referent. 
If we are asked what the symbol ‘ orange ’ refers to, 
we may define this symbol by taking something which 
isorange and saying “To anything which is like this 
thing in respect of colour the symbol ‘ orange ’ is 
applicable.” Here we have substituted for ‘orange’ 
‘like this in respect of colour,’ and the referents of 
both symbols are the same. Our starting-point is 
This and the relation is Likeness, and anyone who 
knows what ‘This’ stands for (i.r., is not blind) and 
knows what ‘ Likeness ’ stands for will get there. 

3. Spatial Relations 

In, On, Above, Between, Beside, To the right of. 
Near, Bigger than. Part of, are obvious examples. 
“‘Orange’ is a symbol for the colour of the region 
between red and yellow in a spectrum (and of any 
colour like this).” It will be noted that the naming 
relation is involved in this as in every definition, and 
that the definition is always extendable by a similarity 
relation. It is curious that some of these symbols for 
spatial relations are unsymmetrical. Thus we have 
‘ on ’ = ‘ above and in contact with,’ but no abbreviation 
for ‘ under and in contact with,’ except such ambiguous 
words as ‘supporting.’ We may further note that 
most of the common uses of ‘ on ’ are so strangely 
metaphorical that it has even been doubted whether 
there is not some simple unanalysable relation which has 
not yet been noticed. The right approach to problems 
of metaphorical extension will be considered later in 
this chapter. 

4. Temporal Relations 

‘ Yesterday ’ is the day before to-day ; ‘ Sunday ’ 



THE THEORY OF DEFINITION 


119 

is the first day of the week; ‘ The end of the war ’ 
is X months after event y ; ‘ Lighting-up time ’ is x 
minutes after sunset. 

5. Causation: Physical 

‘Thunder’ is what is caused (not by two clouds 
bumping but) by certain electrical disturbances. ‘ Saw¬ 
dust ’ is what is produced, etc. 

6 . Causation, Psychological 

‘The Unconscious’ is what causes dreams, fugues, 
psychoses, humour and the rest. ‘ Pleasure ’ is ‘ the 
conscious accompaniment of successful psychic activity.’ 

7. Causation Psycho-physical 

In addition to the examples given in the following 
chapter in connection with Beauty, we may define 
‘ A perception of orange ’ as ‘ the effect in consciousness 
of certain vibrations falling on the retina.’ 

Causal relations are probably the routes of identi¬ 
fication most commonly employed in general discussion, 
as well as in science. Thus a view of great historical 
consequence defines the Deity as the Cause of the 
Universe, while the importance of Embryology in 
zoological classification is due to the causal defining 
relations which are thereby provided. 

• 

8. Being the Object of a Mental State 

The right-hand side of our triangle, Referring, is 
one of these ; so are Desiring, Willing, Feeling, etc. 
Thus ‘ Piteous things ’ may be defined as those towards 
which we feel pity, and ‘ Good things ’ are those which 
we approve of approving. 

9. Common Complex Relations 

Some definitions are most conveniently formulated 
in complex form. While capable of being analysed 
out into sets of simple relations falling under one or 
other of the above headings, they are more readily 
applicable as popularly symbolized. 



120 THE MEANING OF MEANING 

Examples are ‘ utility ’ (analysable into Nos. 7 and 
8), ‘ Imitation ’ (2 and 7), ‘ Implication ’ (i and 8). 

10. Legal Relations 

These are so frequently employed and implied, 
though often disguised, that it seems worth while to 
give them a separate heading; moreover, they are 
subject to an arbitrary test—satisfying the judge. 

Examples: ‘Belonging to’ (when = ‘owned by’), 
‘Subject of,’ ‘Liable to,’ ‘Evidence of.’ All le^al 
definitions are highly complex, though none the less 
serviceable. 

The above relations are those which considerable 
experience has shown to be commonly employed in 
definitions. Any other relations which might be re¬ 
quired for special purposes equally deserve to be 
included in a complete hst—^Shape, Function, Purpose’, or 
Opposition, for example It is therefore neither claimed 
that the first eight groups exhaust the relevant elementary 
relations, nor that those complex relations which we 
have cited can be reduced without remainder to relations 
of these types. The whole classification is on a prag¬ 
matic basis, and merely on the level of the most usual 
universes of discourse. 

It has also proved unnecessary to discuss whether 
and in what sense all relations may be logically 
reducible to one or more ultimate kinds,^ for any such 
reduction would make no difference to the value of the 
definitions we have been considering in their appro¬ 
priate field. Even definitions of considerable com¬ 
plexity, involving a variety of theories, can be reduced 
without difficulty to discussable morsels, and their 
validity as substitutes the better examined. This further 
illustrates the fact that definitions often go by stages, 
as when our inquirer for Cambridge Circus is not 

* Thus, on Alexander's hypothesis, for instance {Space, Time 
and Deity, I , p 239), " in the end all relation 15 reducible to spatio- 
temporal terms " 



THE THEORY OF DEFINITION 


I2I 


familiar with the British Museum and requires first 
to be directed thither via the Tube from the Marble 
Argh. 

The question of multiple relations raises no diffi¬ 
culty in this connection. A multiple relation holds 
between a number of terms greater than two. Thus, 
Perceiving, as Dr Whitehead has recently insisted, 
is a multiple relation holding between a percipient, 
an object, and the conditions ; and Giving is a multiple 
relation holding between a philanthropist, a donation, 
and a beneficiary. In defining any of these terms, or 
in taking any of them as a starting-point for a route 
of definition, we proceed in exactly the same fashion 
as with dual relations—except that bearings must be 
taken from more than one landmark, when the universe 
of discourse demands special accuracy. Othenvise 
the Definiendum is not reached. Thus, in defining 
some object as what so-and-so saw, it may on some 
occasions be necessary to state the conditions—as in 
a seance we need to know the strictness of the test; 
or in identifying a passing train as an Express we have 
to consider the speed of our own train. But much 
discussion can be profitably undertaken without such 
complex situations arising. 

The practical aspect of the above list of routes of 
definition deserves to be insisted upon. The reason 
for using definitions at all is practical. We use them 
to make discussion more profitable, to bring different 
thinkers into open agreement or disagreement with 
one another. There is, it is true, a more recondite 
use of definition derived from this simple primitive 
use. Definitions are of great importance in the 
construction of deductive, scientific systems, those 
automatic thinking-machines for which logic and 
mathematics are, as it were, the rules or instructions. 
In such a deductive system as mechanics, for example, 
it is through the definitions employed that the parts 
of the symbolic system are linked together, so that a 



122 THE MEANING OF MEANING 

given manipulation of the symbolism will yield com¬ 
parable results even when their precise nature is not 
foreseen by the manipulator. Thus, for such systems 
there comes to be something which is regarded as the 
definition of a particular symbol. Given the system, 
there will be one and only one definition of a symbol 
which is the right or proper definition, in the sense that 
the working of the system depends upon the employ¬ 
ment of this definition. 

Specialists who are much concerned with such 
systems naturally tend to regard all definitions in 
the same manner. Yet for many of the most in¬ 
teresting topics of discussion a quite different atti¬ 
tude and habit of mind as regards definitions is not 
only desirable, but, in fact, necessary, if fruitful 
discussion is to be possible. In aesthetics, politics, 
psychology, sociology, and so forth, the stage of 
systematic symbolization with its fixed and unalter¬ 
able definitions has not been reached. Such studies 
as these are not far enough advanced for anyone yet 
to decide which system is most advantageous and 
least likely to exclude important aspects. The most 
highly systematized sciences are those which deal 
with the simplest aspects of nature. The more diffi¬ 
cult and to many people, naturally, the more attractive 
subjects are still in a stage in which it is an open 
question which symbolization is most desirable. At 
this stage what has chiefly to be avoided is the veiled 
and hidden strife between rival systems in their early 
forms, which more than anything else prevents mutual 
understanding even between those who may be in 
agreement. Many terms used in discussions where 
‘ faith,’ ‘ beautiful,’ ‘ freedom,’ ‘ good,’ ‘ belief,’ ‘energy,’ 
‘justice,’ ‘the State’ constantly occur are used with 
no distinct reference, the speaker being guided merely 
by his linguistic habits and a simple faith in the 
widespread possession of these habits. Hence the 
common sight of anger aroused by the hearer’s apparent 



THE THEORY OF DEFINITION 123 

obtuseness and wrong-headedness “where the matter 
is surely self-evident.” 

But even in those rarer discussions in which the 
speakers are capable of greater explicitness, the curious 
instinctive tendency to believe that a word has its own 
true or proper use, which we have seen has its roots 
in magic, too often prevents this ability to produce 
definitions from taking effect. No doubt other factors 
are involved. Lack of practice, literary fetishes con¬ 
cerning elegance of diction, reluctance to appear 
pedantic, defensive mimicry and other protective uses 
of language all contribute. But far more important 
than these is the instinctive attitude to words as natural 
containers of power, which has, as we have shown, from 
the dawn of language been assumed by mankind, and 
is still supported and encouraged by all the earlier 
stages of education. 

The correction for this persistent tendency is a 
greater familiarity with the more common routes of 
definition, and a lively sense, which might easily be 
awakened as a part of education, that our use of any 
given word to stand for our referent on any occasion 
is not due to any particular fitness of the word for that 
particular referent, but is determined by all sorts of odd 
accidents of our own history. We ought to regard 
communication as a difficult matter, and close corre¬ 
spondence of reference for different thinkers as a 
comparatively rare event. It is never safe to assume 
that it has been secured unless both the starting-points 
and the routes of definition, whereby the referents of 
at least a majority of the symbols employed have been 
reached, are known. 

In this chapter we are, for the sake of simplicity, 
confining our attention to reference alone. In actual 
discussion terms are used at least as much for the sake 
of their suasory and emotive effects as for their strictly 
symbolic value. Any substitute for ‘ beautiful,’ for 
example, inevitably falls so flatly and heavily that 



124 


THE MEANING OF MEANING 


many people prefer to use the term with all its dangers 
rather than the psychological jargon which they may 
agree is more satisfactory from a scientific as opposed 
to an emotive point of view. 

It is often, indeed, impossible to decide, whether a 
particular use of symbols is primarily symbolic or 
emotive. This is especially the case with certain kinds 
of metaphor. When the Psalmist cries of his enemies, 
“They have sharpened their tongues like a serpent; 
adders’ poison is under their lips,” it is hard to 
determine whether an elusive similarity between the 
reptile and the persons he is describing is enabling him 
metaphorically to state something about them, or 
whether the sole function of his utterance is not to 
express his abhorrence of them and to promote similar 
attitudes towards them in his hearers. Most terms of 
abuse and endearment raise this problem, which, as a 
rule, it IS, fortunately, not important to settle. The 
distinction which is important is that between utterances 
in which the symbolic function is subordinate to the 
emotive act and those of which the reverse is true. In 
the first case, however precise and however elaborate 
the references communicated may be, they can be seen 
to be present in an essentially instrumental capacity, 
as means to emotive effects. In the second case, how¬ 
ever strong the emotive effects, these can be seen to 
be by-products not essentially involved in the speech 
transaction. The peculiarity of scientific statement, 
that recent new development of linguistic activity, is 
its restriction to the symbolic function. 

If this restriction is to be maintained, and if scientific 
methods of statement are to be extended to fields such 
as those traditionally tended by philosophers, certain 
very subtle dangers must be provided for. Amongst 
these is the occurrence, in hitherto quite unsuspected 
numbers, of words which have been erroneously 
regarded without question as symbolic in function. 
The word ‘ good ’ may be taken as an example. It 



THE THEORY OF DEFINITION 


125 


seems probable that this word is essentially a collection 
of homonyms, such that the set of things, roughly, 
those in connection with which we heard it pronounced 
in early years (a good bed, a good kick, a good baby, 
a good God) have no common characteristic. But 
another use of the word is often asserted to occur, of 
which some at least of those which we have cited are 
supposed to be degenerations, where ‘ good ’ is alleged 
to stand for a unique, unanalysable concept. This 
concept, it is said, is the subject-matter of Ethics.^ 
This peculiar ethical use of ‘ good ’ is, we suggest, a 
purely emotive use. When so used the word stands 
for nothing whatever, and has no symbolic function. 
Thus, when we so use it in the sentence, 'This is good,’ 
we merely refer to this, and the addition of ‘ is good ’ 
makes no difference whatever to our reference. When 
on the other hand, we say 'This is red,’ the addition 
of ‘ is red ’ to ‘ this ’ does symbolize an extension of our 
reference, namely, to some other red thing. But ‘is 
good ’ has no comparable symbolic function; it serves 
only as an emotive sign expressing our attitude to this, 
and perhaps evoking similar attitudes in other persons, 
or inciting them to actions of one kind or another. 

The recognition that many of the most popular 
subjects of discussion are infested with symbolically 
blank but emotively active words of this kind is a 
necessary preliminary to the extension of scientific 
method to these questions. Another is some technique 
by which to ascertain which words are of this nature 
and on what occasions. Whether experimental and 
physiological methods can at present yield any result 
may be doubted, but the ultimate settlement of the 
matter can hardly be expected until tests in some 

^ Cf G, E Moore, Pnncipia Ethtca, Chap I Of course, if we 
define ‘ the good ' as ‘ that of which we approve of approving,' or 
give any such definition when wc say " This is good," we shall be 
making an assertion It is only the indefinable ' good' which we 
suggest to be a purely emotive sign The ' something more ' or some¬ 
thing else ' which, it is alleged, is not covered by any definition of 
* good ' IS the emotional aura of the word 



126 THE MEANING OF MEANING 

way independent of the opinion of the speaker are 
obtained. 

In all discussions we shall find that what is said is 
only in part determined by the things to which the 
speaker is referring. Often without a clear conscious¬ 
ness of the fact, people have preoccupations which 
determine their use of words. Unless we are aware of 
their purposes and interests at the moment, we shall 
not know what they are talking about and whether their 
referents are the same as ours or not. 

Purpose affects vocabulary in two ways. Sometimes 
without affecting reference it dictates the choice of 
symbols specially suited to an occasion. Thus, the 
language of a teacher in describing his spectroscope to 
a child may differ from that in which he describes it to 
his colleague or to his hancee without there being any 
difference in his reference. Or an elegant writer will 
ring the changes on a series of synonyms * without 
changing his reference. On the other hand, a physicist 
uses different language from that employed by his guide 
in order to discuss the Spectre of the Brocken ; their 
different purposes affect their language in this case 
through altering their references. 

It is plain that cases of the first kind are much 
simpler than those of the second; only the latter are 
likely to lead to vain controversies. Thus, if one dis¬ 
putant talks of public opinion he may be referring to 
what others would call the views of certain newspaper 
owners, in which case an argument as to whether the 
Press influences public opinion would tend to be incon¬ 
clusive in the absence of some third party familiar with 
the technique of definition. Such arguments are of 
constant occurrence even in the most intelligent circles, 
although when examined in the clear light of criticism 
they usually appear too foolish to be possible. 

But how should a discussion whose aim is the 

* Complete bynonyms, » e , words alike in all their functions, probably 
do not occur But partial syaonyms which are used for the same 
reference are not uncommon 



THE THEORY OF DEFINITION 


127 

removal of uncertainty as to whether the parties to it 
are referring to the same things or not be conducted? 

The first necessity is to remember that since the 
past histories of individuals differ except in certain very 
simple respects, it is probable that their reactions to 
and employment of any general word will vary. There 
will be some to whom a word is merely a stimulus to 
the utterance of other words without the occurrence of 
any reference—the psittacists, that is to say, who 
respond to words, much as they might respond to the 
first notes of a tune which they proceed almost auto¬ 
matically to complete. At the other extreme there will 
be some for whom every word used symbolizes a definite 
and completely articulated reference. With the first we 
are not here concerned, but as regards the others, unless 
we have good evidence to the contrary we should assume 
that, clear though their ideas may be, they will probably 
not be ideas of the same things. It is plain that we can 
only identify referents through the references made to 
them. Different references then, may be to the same 
referent, sufficiently similar ones must be ; and it is 
only by ensuring similarity of reference that we can 
secure identity in our referents. For this it is desirable 
to symbolize references by means of the simple routes 
of definition discussed above. We must choose as 
starting-poirits either things to which we can point, or 
which occur freely in ordinary experience. The routes 
by which we link these starting-points to our desired 
referents must be thoroughly familiar, which in practice 
confines us to four main routes and combinations of 
these. They are those which we must know and 
unerringly recognize if we are to survive—Similarity, 
Causation, Space and Time. In practice, however, it 
is often sufficient to start from less primitive initial 
points and follow more complicated and dangerous 
routes. Thus ‘razor’ = ‘ instrument used for shaving’ 
unambiguously, without it being necessary to reduce 
‘ used for ’ any further by analysis. 



128 THE MEANING OF MEANING 

At what point our definitions are thorough enough 
must be left for the occasion to decide. In viva voce 
discussion, unless unduly prolonged and pertinacious, 
little can be hoped for except stimulus and hints which 
will be of use in more serious endeavours. But where 
there is reason to suppose that a slippery term is being 
employed, it is a wise policy to collect as wide a range 
of uses as possible without at this stage seeking for a 
common element. A good dictionary attempts this for 
certain words, but usually from an historical standpoint 
and on no theoretical principle. The next step is to 
order these uses with a view to discovering which main 
routes of identification have been adopted for the 
referents concerned. It is not necessary that the 
separate definitions so formulated should be mutually 
exclusive ; very often they will cover the same referents 
but with different references. In such cases we may 
be confronted by the problem of levels of reference above 
alluded to. ‘ Animal ’ in current speech, and ‘ mammal ’ 
in zoology stand for almost the same referents; but the 
references differ very greatly in the definiteness and 
complexity of the sign-chains involved. These differ¬ 
ences should, if possible, be indicated in the formulation 
of the definitions. What is required is that each defini¬ 
tion should unmistakably mark out a certain range 
of referents. If two definitions mark out the same range 
no harm is done, the essential consideration being that 
each range should be clearly separated from the others 
so as to be capable of treatment on its own merits. 

The natural tendency of those accustomed to tradi¬ 
tional procedure is to expect that since what appears 
to be one word is being defined, the alternative substitute 
symbols will stand for referents with some common 
character of a more or less recondite nature. This may 
sometimes occur, but the inquiry as to whether there 
is such a common character should be postponed to a 
much later stage. The slightest study of the way in 
which words in ordinary speech gain occasional de- 



THE THEORY OF DEFINITION 129 

rivative and supernumerary uses through metaphorical 
shifts of all degrees of subtlety, and through what can 
be called linguistic accidents, is enough to show that 
for a common element of any interest or importance to 
run through all the respectable uses of a word is most 
unlikely. Each single metaphorical shift does, of 
course, depend upon some common element which is 
shared by the original reference and by the reference 
which borrows the symbol. Some part of the two 
contexts of the references must be the same. But the 
possible overlaps between contexts are innumerable, 
and there is no reason to expect that any word at all 
rich in context will always be borrowed on the strength 
of the same similarity or overlap. Thus, Beautiful* 
and Beautiful® may symbolize references with something 
in common; so may Beautiful®and Beautiful”, but it 
by no means follows that these common elements will be 
the same or that the three symbols will stand for referents 
which share anything whatever of interest. Yet few 
writers who concern themselves with such wandering 
words resist the temptation to begin their inquiry with 
a search for essential or irreducible meanings. 

The temptation has been greatly increased by the 
tendency of dictionaries to isolate an arbitrary nucleus 
of uses in the interests of conciseness, and to treat as 
* dead ’ or ‘ accidental ’ just those senses which are likely 
to prove most troublesome in discussion. In some cases 
historical changes as well as phonetic modifications in 
the symbol itself are readily distinguishable. Thus 
with persona — person—parson the shifts can be seen at a 
glance in the following scheme : *— 

I A .. .. Mask. 

2. A+B .. .. Character indicated by a mask 

3 B .. .. Character or r61e in a play. 

4. B+C .. One who represents a character. 

5. C Representative m general. 

6. C+D Representative of church in parish. 

7 D Parson. 

^ Greenongh and Kittredge, Words and thetr Ways tn English Spesdi, 
p. 268. 



130 


THE MEANING OF MEANING 


The whole of this development took place in Latin, 
but when in English the word was borrowed in the 
form persoun, which Chaucer uses, a transference and 
fading out of the metaphor in B produces Bi, the shift 
to ‘ personage ’; and parson is a phonetic spelling of this 
older form. In this manner about a dozen uses of a 
word may often be found; and where the historical or 
phonetic separation is not clearly defined confusion 
is inevitable unless the objects referred to are so readily 
distinguishable as to encourage the punster. 

If we wish to mediate between rival views it is far 
better to assume that the disputants are terminologically 
independent than to assume that they must in all respects 
use their words alike. With the first procedure, if there 
actually is a common element involved, we shall be in 
a good position to discover it. With the second we 
shall inevitably tend to misrepresent all the views con¬ 
cerned and to overlook most of their really valuable and 
peculiar features. The synthesis of diverse opinions, 
if It is attempted at all, should be postponed until each 
view has been examined as completely as possible in 
isolation. Premature efforts, to which all our natural 
attitudes to symbols conspire to tempt us, are an 
unfailing source of confusion. 

For those whose approach to symbols is unreflective 
it is often difficult to believe that such convenient words 
as ‘beauty,’ ‘meaning,’ or ‘truth’ are actually not 
single words at all, but sets of superficially indistin¬ 
guishable yet utterly discrepant symbols. The reasons 
why this is so are, however, not hard to point out. 
Language, which has developed chiefly to satisfy the 
exigencies of everyday practical intercourse, presents 
a remarkable unevenness in the density of distribution 
of its units when we regard it from the standpoint of 
our theoretical needs. Thus it constantly happens 
that one word has to serve functions for which a hundred 
would not be too many. Why language is often so 
recalcitrant to growth at these points is a puzzling 



THE THEORY OF DEFINITION 131 

problem. Shortage of terms in the established sciences 
is met without difficulty by the introduction of new 
terms. But with sciences in their initial stages, before 
they have developed into affairs for specialists, and 
while they are still public concerns, the resistance to 
new terms is very great. Probably the explanation 
of this is to be found in the lack of emotive power which 
is a peculiarity of all technicalities. 

The result of this scarcity of terms is that any 
reference whatever made to these symbolically starved 
topics is forced to make use of the few words which are 
available, no matter how distinct its referents may be 
from those of other references which also use the same 
words. Thus any reference to human activities which 
are neither theoretical nor practical tends to be sym¬ 
bolized by the word ‘ aesthetic ’; and derivatively any¬ 
thing which we are not merely concerned either to 
know or to change tends to be described as beautiful. 
And this, no matter how many fundamentally different 
attitudes to things we may come to distinguish. We 
have here a cause for the extravagant ambiguity of all 
the more important words used in general discussion; 
one which supplements and reinforces the processes of 
metaphorical shift just considered. 

At the b£ginning, then, of any serious examination 
of these subjects we should provide ourselves with as 
complete a list as possible of different uses of the 
principal words. The reason for making this list as 
complete as possible, subject, of course, to common 
sense and ordinary discretion, is important It is 
extraordinarily difficult in such fields to retain con¬ 
sistently what may be called a ‘sense of position.’ 
The process of investigation consists very largely of 
what, to the investigator, appear to be flashes of 
insight, sudden glimpses of connections between 
things and sudden awareness of distinctions and dif¬ 
ferences. These, in order to be retained, have to be 
symbolized, if, indeed, they do not, as is most often 



132 THE MEANING OF MEANING 

the case, originally occur in an already symbolized 
state. 

Without such a map of the separable fields covered 
by the investigation any constatation giniale is liable to be 
confused with another, to their common detriment, or 
to yield an apparent contradiction of purely verbal 
origin. If, however, we are able at once to locate the 
idea in its proper province, the accident that we have 
to use the same words as totally distinct symbols is 
deprived of its power to disturb our orientation. The 
mere ad hoc distinction between two or perhaps three 
senses of a word made in response to particular exi¬ 
gencies of controversy is insufficient. We can never 
foretell on what part of the total field light will next bi 
vouchsafed, and unless we know in outline what the 
possibilities are we are likely to remain ignorant of 
what it is into which we have had insight. 

Not all words are worth so much trouble. It might 
be supposed that it is rather certain subjects which do 
not merit attention, but closer scrutiny suggests that 
these subjects, of which Theology appears to be a good 
example, are themselves merely word systems. But 
even the most barren fields have their psychological 
interest, and those who approach a discussion armed 
with a symbolic technique and able to. apply such 
principles as the Canons dealt with in the last chapter 
may hope every day and in every way to find them¬ 
selves better and better. 

Something, however, can be achieved even by those 
who shrink from the severities of the Six Canons. In 
his Art of Controroersy, of which he remarked “ I am 
not aware that anything has been done in this direc¬ 
tion although I have made inquiries far and wide,” 
Schopenhauer says, “ It would be a very good thing 
if every trick could receive some short and obviously 
appropriate name, so that when a man used this or 
that particular trick, he could be at once reproached for 
it. ” This suggestion is supported by Professor Dewey’s 



THE THEORY OF DEFINITION 


133 


characterization of the verbal sign as a fence; a label; 
and a vehicle: that is to say it selects and detaches 
meanings from out of the void, and makes what was 
dim and vague stand out as a clear-cut entity— 
secondly, it conserves the meaning thus Axed for 
future use, and, thirdly, enables it to be applied and 
transported to a new context and a new situation. Or 
in less metaphysical language, a S3rmbol assists us in 
separating one reference from another, in repeating a 
reference we have already made, and in making partially 
analogous references in other contexts In all these ways 
a notation of the devices of the controversialist would 
be very desirable 

Three such tricks may thus be readily stigmatized. 
The first, the Phonetic subterfuge, would be considered 
too simple to be dangerous if history bore no testimony 
to its effects. It consists in treating words which sound 
alike as though their expansions must be analogous. 
The .most famous case is Mill’s use of ‘ desirable ’ as 
though it must expand in the same way as ‘ visible ’ or 
'knowable.’ The subterfuge is to be charged against 
language rather than against Mill, and is plainly verbal. 
‘Desirable,’ in the sense equivalent to ‘ought to be 
desired,’ may be reducible to ‘can be desired by a mind 
of a certain organization,’' but is not on all fours as a 
symbol with ‘ visible ’ in the sense of ‘ able to be seen 
by somebody.’ 

The second subterfuge, the Hypostatic, is more 
difficult to discourage because it is a misuse of an 
indispensable linguistic convenience. We must, if 
we are ever to finish making any general remark, 
contract and condense our language, but we need not 
hypostatize our contractions. The point has been 
referred to in connectio.i with Universals, but how 
popular and how influential is this practice may be 

' This theory of value is developed in op ctt , Principles of Literary 
Criticism, where arguments against it as a * naturahstic fallacy ' are 
disposed of 



THE MEANING OF MEANING 


134 

shown by such a list of terms as the following :—Virtue, 
Liberty, Democracy, Peace, Germany, Religion, Glory. 
All invaluable words, indispensable even, but able 
to confuse the clearest issues, unless controlled by 
Canon III. 

The third, the Utraquistic subterfuge, has probably 
made more bad argument plausible than any other 
controversial device which can be practised upon 
trustful humanity. It has long been recognized that 
the term ‘ perception ’ may have either a physical or a 
mental referent. Does it refer to what is perceived, or 
to the perceiving of this? Similarly, ‘ knowledge’ may 
refer to what is known or to the knowing of it. The 
Utraquistic subterfuge consists in the use of such terms 
for both at once of the diverse referents in question. 
We have it typically when the term ‘ beauty ’ is em¬ 
ployed, reference being made confusedly both to 
qualities of the beautiful object and to emotional effects 
of these qualities on the beholder. 

Sometimes two or more of these subterfuges may be 
located in the same word. Thus ‘ Beauty ’ on most 
occasions is a double offender, both hypostatic and 
utraquistic. 

In addition to this labelling of controversial tricks, 
a further set of Rules of Thumb may be laid down for 
practical guidance in conformity with the six Canons. 
In a recent Symposium of the Aristotelian Society on 
Mental Activity, carried on for the most part in in¬ 
verted commas, it was not surprising to find Professor 
Carveth Read remarking once more that “ the com¬ 
monest cause of misunderstanding has long been recog¬ 
nized to lie in the ambiguity of terms, and yet we make 
very little progress in agreeing upon definitions. Even 
if we sometimes seem to be agreed upon the use of an 
important word, presently a new interest awakens or an 
old interest acquires new life ; and then, if its adherents 
think it would be strengthened by using that word in 
another sense they make no scruple about altering it.” 



THE THEORY OF DEFINITION 


135 

Over two years later at the tenth annual meeting 
of the American Philosophical Association we find 
Professor Lovejoy breaking in on a similar series of 
misunderstandings with the remark, “ More adherence 
to definitions is required if we are to come to an 
understanding. Appoint a committee to define the 
fundamental terms which are to be used in the dis¬ 
cussion.” 

When we consider the amount of time we spend 
to-day in such discussion and the number of words we 
utter in the course of a single day—it is calculated 
that when vocal we emit between 150 and 250 words 
per minute—it is of some importance to recognize 
certain classes of these words which are liable to mislead 
in controversy. 

“In Psychology what seems ‘is’” it has been 
happily said. Is what ‘seems’ Real? “Everything,” 
replies Bosanquet, “ is Real so long as we do not take 
it for what it is not.” “ I somewhat uncautiously speak 
of mind as a Thing,” confessed Professor Alexander— 
and still more regretfully “ I have used the unfortunate 
word Phenomenon. I have made up my mind that I 
shall never use the word Phenomenon again without 
carefully defining its meaning. How Mr Stout can 
say I describe the mind as if it were not a Phenomenon 
passes my ‘comprehension. I meant by the word 
Almost Nothing at all.” This is reminiscent of Croce’s 
dictum with regard to the Sublime: “the Sublime is 
everything that is or will be so called by those who 
have employed or shall employ the name.” The chief 
function of such terms in general discussion is to act 
as Irritants, evoking emotions irrelevant to the deter¬ 
mination of the referent. This is an abuse of the 
poetical function of language to which we shall return. 

There is much scope for what may be called the 
Eugenics of Language, no less than for the Ethics of 
Terminology. 

Foreshadowing the conscious process of Linguistic 



136 THE MEANING OF MEANING 

elimination Mr Alfred Sidgwick has drawn attention 
under the title “Spoilt Words” to terms ambiguous 
beyond remedy. But having thus stated the problem, 
he leaves it. Language, as we know, was made be¬ 
fore people learned to think: in the phraseology of 
Mill, by the ‘ vulgar ’; and it is still being so made in 
the form in which we use it in conversation, however 
much we may regret the fact. It is very questionable 
how far we do but add to the existing confusion by 
endeavouring to restrict the meaning of these Unfor¬ 
tunates. When we remember that it is not round words 
only that emotional and other associations gather, 
but that Victor Hugo, for instance (as Ribot has 
pointed out), saw in each letter, even, a symbolic repre¬ 
sentation of some essential aspect of human know¬ 
ledge,^ it is somewhat optimistic to put trust in the 
efficacy of restriction of meaning in discussion. “ I be¬ 
lieve,” said Max Muller, “that it would really be of the 
greatest benefit to mental science if all such terms as 
impressions, sensations—soul, spirit, and the rest, 
could, for a time, be banished, and not be readmitted 
till they had undergone a thorough purification.” 
And in his remarkable analysis of the Economics of 
Fatigue and Unrest (1924) Dr Sargant Florence has 
successfully employed this method by eliminating 
altogether the terms ‘ fatigue ’ and ‘ unrest ’ in the earlier 
stages (Chapters V.-XI.) of his argument. 

“Never change native names, for there are Names 
in every nation God-given, of unexplained power in 
the mysteries.” So says a Chaldean Oracle with true 
insight. But in prose discussions which aim at the 
avoidance of mysteries, both Irritants and Degenerates 
must be ruthlessly rejected—Irritants because of their 
power to evoke disturbing emotions, and Degenerates 
because of the multiplicity of their associated referents. 

^ The importance of calligraphy in Chinese wnbng is an instance 
of sesthetic intrusion in a system of prose signs—even where the pictonal 
appeal of the signs themselves has varnished 



THE THEORY OF DEFINITION 137 

It is not necessary here to compile the Index Ex- 
purgatorius from ‘ Appearance ’ to ‘ Reality,’ or as 
near Z as possible. 

There is another class of words which may profitably 
be placed beyond the range of legitimate dispute. 
Matthew Arnold speaks of “terms thrown out, so to 
speak, at a not fully grasped object of the speaker’s 
consciousness.” So long as the true function of these 
Mendicants, as they might be designated, is recog¬ 
nized, they will cause little trouble. They must never 
receive harsh treatment; decasualization is the remedy. 

To be distinguished from Mendicants, which may be 
assumed to possess the homing instinct, are Nomads, 
whose mode of life was first described by Locke. 

"Men having been accustomed from their cradle to learn 
words which are easily got and retained, before they knew or had 
framed the complete ideas which they express, they usually con- 
tmue to do so all their lives, and without taking the pains 
necessary to settle m their minds determined ideas, they use their 
words for such unsteady and confused notions as they have, 
contenting themselves with the same words as other people use, 
as if the very sound necessanly carried with it the same meaning 
This (although men make a shift with it in ordinary occurrences 
of hfe, yet when they come to reason conceriung their Tenets) it 
manifestly fills their discourse with abundance of empty noise 
and jargon—especially in moral matters where the bare sound 
of the words aye often only thought on, or at least very un- 
certam and obscure notions annexed to them 

Men take the words they find in use amongst their neighbours, 
and that tbey may not seem ignorant what they stand for use 
them confidently without much troublmg their heads about a 
certain fixed meanmg, whereby besides the ease of it they obtain 
this advantage that as m sndi discourse they are seldom in the 
right so they are seldom to be convinced they are m the wrong. 
It bemg all one to draw these men out of their mistakes, who have 
no settled notions, as to dispossess a Vagrant of his habitation, 
who has no settled abode. This I guess to be so; and every one 
ma y observe m himself or others whether it be so or not " 

We can still agree to-day that there is little doubt 
as to whether it be so or not; and if we were able more 
readily to recognize these Nomads, we should spend 



138 THE MEANING OF MEANING 

less time in the frenzied rifling of Cenotaphs which is 
at present so much in favour. 

When we enter the Enchanted Wood of Words, our 
Rules of Thumb may enable us to deal not only with 
such evil genii as the Phonetic, the Hypostatic and the 
Utraquistic subterfuges, but also with other disturbing 
apparitions of which Irritants, Mendicants and Nomads 
are examples; such Rules, however, derive their virtue 
from the more refined Canons, whose powers we have 
already indicated. 

It may, however, be asked. What is the use of 
knowing the nature of definition, for does not the 
difficulty consist in hitting upon the precise definition 
which would be useful ? There are two answers to this. 
In the first place, the ability to frame definitions comes 
for most people only with practice, like surgery, diag¬ 
nosis or cookery, but, as in these arts, a knowledge 
of principles is of great assistance. Secondly, such a 
knowledge of general principles renders any skill 
acquired in the course of special study of one field 
available at once when we come to deal with other 
but similar fields. In all the main topics of discussion 
—i^sthetics. Ethics, Religion, Politics, Economics, 
Psychology, Sociology, History—the same types of 
defining relations occur, and thus a theoretical mastery 
of any one of them gives confidence in the attack upon 
the others. 
