
CHAPTER V 


THE CANONS OF SYMBOLISM 

A happy nomenclature has sometimes been mote 
powerful than rigorous logic in allowing a new tram 
of thought to be quickly and generally accepted — 

Ptof A Schuster 

For the rest I should not be displeased, sir, did you 
enter a little fartlier into the details of the turns of 
mind which appear marvellous in the use of the 
particles — Lcibnit: 

At the basis of all communication are certain postulates 
or pre-requisites — regulative presumptions without 
which no system of symbols, no science, not even 
logic, could develop. Their neglect by logicians is 
not surprising, since it has hitherto been nobody’s 
business to discuss them. Logic, which may be 
regarded as the science of the systemati 7 ation of 
symbols, has been preoccupied either with judgments 
which are psychological, or with ‘propositions,’ which 
were treated as objects of thought, distinct from 
symbols and not psychological. Modern mathemati¬ 
cians, who have done so much for the formal develop¬ 
ment of Symbolic method, either tacitly assume these 
Canons, or when confronted by difficulties due to their 
neglect, introduce additional ere/ hoc complexities* into 
their systems. Actually they are as essential to all 
discourse as chemistry to physiology, dynamics to 
ballistics, or psychology to aislhetics. In any logic 
which is not purely formal, in the sense of being 

1 For instance, the Theory of Types—to deal with Epimenidts and 
the alleged mendacity of Cretans , or Subsistence Theoncs in the 
interpretation of " Phcemxes exist ‘ 

87 



88 THE MEANING OF MEANING 

devoted to some elaboration of the possibilities of 
symbol-manipulation,* the study of these Canons is a 
first essential, and their strict observance would render 
otiose whole tracts of the traditional treatment. 

It will be convenient to state some of these Canons 
in terms of Symbols and Referents. The triangle of 
Reference given on p. ii should be consulted. The 
First Canon of Symbolism, the Canon of Singularity, 
is as follows:— 

I.— One Symbol stands for one and only one Referent. 

This one referent may be, and in most cases is, 
complex. ‘ All Mongolian Imbeciles,’ for instance, is 
a symbol which has one referent Similarly (;r or y) 
has one referent. The symbols of mathematics, how¬ 
ever, are peculiar in that they are symbols either of 
other symbols or of operations with symbols. This 
peculiarity is what is often expressed by saying that 
pure mathematics is abstract, or formal, or that it does 
not mention anything at all. Symbols may contain 
necessary parts, e.g., the negative, and words like ‘ the ’ 
and ‘ which,’ which themselves have no specific referents. 
The study of such non-symbolic structural elements of 
symbols is the business of grammar. 

These indications of structure appear in ordinary 
language in a bewildering variety of forms. The 
infiexions, the conjunctions, distributives, auxiliary verbs, 
some of the prepositions, the main use of the copula, etc., 
all have this function. In mathematics, owing to the 
simplicity of its outlook, these structural elements are 
reduced to the minimum; otherwise such symbols for 
counting operations as two and three, or such symbols 
of symbols as algebraic expressions could never be 
handled systematically. Recent views on mathematics 
show a refreshing reaction from the logical mysticism or 

^ In op at, Symbolism and Truth (pp 92 and 224 fit) Professor 
R. M Eaton deals interestingly with the rules of a logical syntax 
from a semi-orthodox standpoint ' 



THE CANONS OF SYMBOLISM 


89 

arithmosophy of Frege, Couturat and others, prevalent 
at the beginning of the century. It is clearly felt that 
an account which does not invoke supersensible entities 
must be given of what mathematiaans do 

Some, like Wittgenstein, have been able to persuade 
themselves that ‘ ‘ The propositions of mathematics are 
equations, and therefore pseudo-propositions,’’ and that 
“ the method by which mathematics arrives at its equa¬ 
tions IS the method of substitution. For equations 
express the substitutability of two expressions, and we 
proceed from a number of equations to new equations, 
replacing expressions by others in accordance with the 
equations.”^ Such a view can be presented without the 
background and curtain of mysticism which this author 
introduces. Those parts of mathematics, the Theory 
of Sets of Points, for instance, which do not seem to be 
merely concerned with equations then remain to be 
accounted for. 

Others maintain with Rignano* that mathematics 
throughout is merely the performance of imagined 
physical experiments, recorded and represented in 
symbols. This amplification of the view of James Mill* 
and Taine, though it fits some parts of mathematics 
well enough, is less plausible for others. As Rignano 
develops it, too little importance is assigned to symbols ; 
hightly systematized sets of symbols such as those of 
mathematics are something more than a mere means of 
representing our mental performances. They become, 
as It were capable of performing on their own account. 
They become thinking machines which, suitably manipu- 

> Tractatus Lor^ico-Philosophicus, 6 2 and 6 24 

* The Psychology of Reasoning, Chapters VII and VIII 

* The Anal' sis oj the Human Mind, Vol II , p 9 " Numbers 

therefore, are not names of objects They are names of a certain 
process , the process of addition One is the name of this once 
performed or of the aggregation begun , two, the name of it once 
more performed " Mill jils in his editorial notes on this passage holds 
that ''numbers are, in the strictest propnety, names of objects Two 
is surely a name of the things which are two, two lingers, etc The 
process of addmg one to one which forms two is connoted, not denoted, 
by the name two " An obscure remark, smce this is not even J. S. 
hull's ordinary use of ' connote ' 



90 


THE MEANING OF MEANING 


lated, yield results which cannot be foreseen by any 
process of imagining physical experiments. 

A third school would present mathematics not as a 
thinking machine, but as a set of directions for the use 
of such a machine, the machine in question being the 
mind. For this school mathematics would contain no 
statement but only commands or directions. The 
problem then becomes what exactly mathematicians 
are told to do. 

It IS probable that the answer to this vexed question 
as to the nature of mathematics will be found to consist 
of a combination of these varied doctrines. There is 
no good reason for supposing that mathematics is 
fundamentally homogeneous, although its possession of 
a single symbol system makes it appear so. The known 
readiness with which not only single symbols but whole 
systems of symbols may acquire supernumerary uses 
should make us ready to allow this possibility. It is 
plain that some parts of mathematics are concerned in a 
special way with the discussion of other parts. “ It may 
be that when logic is wholly emancipated from meta¬ 
physics, logicians will devise a grammar of logistic 
language. Perhaps they will then call it the grammar 
of logic, and logistic language will be called logic. All 
that is valuable in the so-called logic will remain as 
component elements of a grammar—a grammar of the 
science of reasoning with language.”* 

Returning from this excursus, it is important to 
remember that a reference, as described above at page 
62, is a set of external and psychological contexts 
linking a mental process to a referent. Thus it is 
extremely unlikely that any two references will ever be 
strictly similar. In asking, therefore, whether two 
symbols are used by the same reference—especially 
when the users thereof are two persons with their 
different histories—we are raising a question of degree. 

* J W Powell, Twenhelh Annual Report of the Bureau of American 
Ethnology (1903), p. clxx. 



THE CANONS OF SYMBOLISM 91 

It is better to ask whether two references have sufficient 
similarity to allow profitable discussion. When such 
discussion is possible the references are said to be ‘ the 
same.’ No means are at present available for directly 
comparing references. We have to judge by indirect 
evidence derived mainly from observing the further 
behaviour of the parties concerned. We notice whether 
doubt and certainty arise at the same points, whether 
both admit alternatives at the same points, and so 
on. But for many important questions in the theory 
of Grammar, especially when discussing the degree to 
which the emotive functions of language interfere with 
the referential, there is urgent need for some more 
easily applicable test. The only hope is in further 
analysis of the contexts operative in reference, with a 
view to selecting from the many contextual factors 
those which are determinative; and meanwhile a clear 
realization of the complexities involved may prevent 
unnecessary dogmatism. 

When a symbol seems to stand for two or more 
referents we must regard it as two or more symbols, 
which are to be differentiated. This Canon guards 
against the most obvious kind of ambiguity, that of 
top (mountain), and top (spinning), for instance. We 
differentiate these symbols by the aid of a Second Canon 
which concerns what is usually called Definition, and is 
also of the utmost importance. 

When we encounter a symbql which we do not com¬ 
prehend we take steps, if interested, to have another 
symbol, which we can interpret, provided, whose 
referent is the same. Then we can say “ I know what 
symbol A means; it means the same as symbol B.” 
(When scholars say ‘ chien ’ means ' dog,’ they should 
say that ‘chien’ and ‘dog’ both mean the same.) 
Similarly if a symbol is long or awkward to use, or 
likely to be misunderstood, we take a new convenient 
symbol and use it instead. In both cases the same 
process. Definition, is occurring. The details of the 



92 


THE MEANING OF MEANING 


technique of definition, as required constantly in dis¬ 
cussion, call for special study and will be dealt with in 
Chapter VI. below. A foundation-stone is laid in the 
Second Canon of Symbolism, the Canon of Definition :— 

II .—Symbols which can be substituted OTie for 
another ^mbohze the same reference. 

By means of this Canon we substitute for the 
ambiguous symbol ‘top’ the synonym ‘mountain top’ 
or ‘ spinning top,’ and the ambiguity is removed. But 
this is not the only use which we make of the Canon. 
Its importance is belied by its modest simplicity. It 
is the guarantor of mathematics. The systematization 
of our symbols (for which we may substitute the phrase 
“the organization of our thought”) is achieved by its 
application. It is plain for instance that the two 
symbols ‘ The King of England ’ and ‘ the owner of 
Buckingham Palace ’ have the same referent. They 
do not however symbolize the same reference, quite 
different psychological contexts being involved in the 
two cases. Accordingly they are not substitutes one 
for another in the sense required in this Canon. 
Symbols which are substitutes and so can be used to 
‘ define ’ ^ one another not only have the same referent 
but symbolize the same reference. Such ^mbols are 
usually said to have the same ‘connotation,’ a mis¬ 
leading and dangerous term, under cover of which the 
quite distinct questions of application of reference and 
correctness of symbolization {cf p. 102 below) are 
unwittingly confused. Connotation will be further 
discussed in Chapter IX. 

But there are more dangerous booby-traps in 
language than the plain equivoque, and “ certain it is,” 
as Bacon has it, “that words like a Tartar’s bow do 

1 As we shall see in the following chapter, this rigorous form of 
definition is chiefly of service in the construction of deductive symbol 
systems The freer forms of definition, in wj^ch it is sufficient if the 
referents alone of the two symbols are identical, are indispensable in 
general discussion. 



THE CANONS OF SYMBOLISM 93 

shoot back upon the understanding and mightily 
entangle and pervert the judgment.” Those complex 
symbols, known as propositions, wnich ‘ place ’ re¬ 
ferents (cf. Canon VI infra) can be either Contracted 
or Expanded. “Hamlet was mad” is a contracted 
symbol, needing to be expanded before it can be 
discussed. “Hamlet was mad on the stage” or “in 
my interpretation of the play ” may be expanded 
symbols for what is referred to. The question is of 
the greatest importance because of its bearing on the 
distinction between true and &lse. It leads to the 
Third Canon of Symbolism, the Canon of Expansion :— 

in .—The referent of a contracted symbol ts the referent 
of that symbol expanded. 

The consequences of infringing this Canon are 
sometimes called Philosophy, as little by little we 
shall proceed to show. 

It is an obvious result of this Canon that the first 
thing to do when a disputed symbol is encountered is 
to expand it, if possible, to its full form—to such a form, 
that is, as will indicate the sign - situations behind 
the reference it symbolizes. Instances of this expansion 
occur continually in all scientific discussion. In the 
last chaptef we had occasion to expand ‘ table ’ and 
‘see’ and later on we shall endeavour to expand 
‘ meaning ’ in all possible directions. Unfortunately in 
the absence of any systematic theory of interpretation, 
no definite ordering of the levels at which we refer has 
hitherto been made. The idea even of a level of 
reference remains vague. Yet when we refer to ‘ that 
animal,’ and then later, after further study of its foot¬ 
prints perhaps, to ‘ that lynx,’ ^ our reference will be to 
the same referent but at different levels of interpretation 


^ For certain sciences, zoology, geology, botany, etc, at certain 
stages, the technique of genus and species arrangement serves this 
purpose excellently. But this technique is not of great service at earlier 
or later stages, or outside such sciences 



THE MEANING OF MEANING 


94 

in a definite sense involving the number of applications 
of interpretative processes and the complexity of these 
processes. In such relatively simple cases matters are 
easy to set straight; in more complicated cases—if we 
speak of government, credit, patriotism, faith, beauty, 
emotion, etc.—it is not so. All our usual discussion of 
subjects of general interest suffers from the uncertainty, 
difficult even to state, as to the level of interpretation, of 
reference, at which we are symbolizing. All those 
engaged in education know what ‘ levels of reference ’ 
stand for. The fuller analysis of the question is of 
great urgency. Something towards it was attempted 
in Chapter IV. It is a pity, however, that those very 
persons who by their analytic ability would be most 
likely to succeed, should be so reluctant to take up 
problems until they have been elaborately formulated. 

Meanwhile such is the chaos of symbolic apparatus 
in general that, instead of expansions, mere symbolic 
overgrowths are most usually what are provided by way 
of elucidation of doubtful symbols, thus leading to 
greater confusion than would the contractions which 
they replace. Instances are given in the following 
paragraph. Both contractions and pseudo-expansions 
have the same result—the peopling of the universe 
with spurious entities, the mistaking of symbolic 
machinery for referents. The only permanent cure is 
the discovery of the appropriate expansion by inquiry 
into the sign-situation leading to the reference which 
is doubtfully symbolized.^ 

It can in fact be recognized without difficulty that 
until this is done it is idle to raise such further questions 
as its truth or its relations to other symbols ; for 
a contracted symbol does not make plain the ‘ place ’ 
of its referent, and so cannot be investigated. The 
distinction between true and false symbols is a matter 

^ In simple but loose words, we only know for certain what is said 
when we know why it is said, though we must not include motives 
in the ‘ why ' 



THE CANONS OF SYMBOLISM 95 

which cannot be discussed profitably in general terms, 
t.e.^ by means of contractions or linguistic shorthand. 
It must be left in each case to the specialist, who being 
familiar with the actual sign-situations involved can 
decide within his particular field of reference which 
symbols are true and which not It is owing to such a 
discussion in contracted symbols that what is known 
as the Problem of Truth has arisen. Instead of treat¬ 
ing each case of adequacy on its own merits, epistemo- 
logists will have it that because they can use one word 
as a convenient shorthand sign to refer to all true 
symbols, there must be something for them to inves¬ 
tigate apart from true and false propositions. No 
problem arises over any true proposition when recog¬ 
nized as such, and to raise a bogus problem here is 
quite as unnecessary as to assume a universal ‘ redness’ 
because red things are every one of them red. Classes 
are now recognized as symbolic fictions, and logisticians 
will only be logical when they admit that universals 
are an analogous convenience. The World of Pure 
Being will then be definitively denuded of its quondam 
denizens, for which the theory of Universals was an 
attempted explanation It should be noted that our 
symbolic machinery (similarity, etc.), becomes both 
more valuable and more comprehensible when these 
desiccated archetypes have faded away. 

By way of explanation of these symbolic con¬ 
veniences a few considerations may be added. Modi¬ 
fications of our sense organs, and ' things ’ as we come 
to know them through the interpretation of these signs, 
are always complex or parts of a complex. Even the 
tiny speck which, in virtue of a certain disturbance 
in the colour apparatus of an eye, we call a barely visible 
star is surrounded by a dark field. All that there is 
in such a sign for us to talk about is this complex, and 
we can talk about it in various ways. We can say 
“the speck is in the field” or “surrounded by the 
field” or “part of the field” or “related to the field 



96 THE MEANING OF MEANING 

by the relation of being enclosed by ” ; or we can say 
“this which has the property of being a speck is 
related to that which has the property of being a field 
by the relation of inclusion.” These are alternative 
locutions, equally true. ‘ Speck in field ’ is a name, 
and so is ‘speck.’ On other occasions, however, we 
wish to symbolize references under circumstances in 
which the same names are correctly reapplied. We 
have to economize in our symbolic material; we have to 
use it over and over again, and in a systematic fashion, 
under pain of failure to communicate. Now if instead 
of the name ‘ this speck ’ we use the more luxuriant 
symbolic growth, ‘ this which has the property of being 
a speck,’ we shall be tempted to suppose that the 
‘ thises ’ on different occasions stand for different referents 
but that ‘ the property of being a speck ’ stands for one 
and the same. 

In this way universal ‘qualities’ arise, phantoms 
due to the refractive power of the linguistic medium ; 
these must not be treated as part of the furniture of 
the universe, but are useful as symbolic accessories 
enabling us to economize our speech material. Uni¬ 
versal ‘relations’ arise in a precisely similar fashion, 
and offer a similar temptation. They may be regarded 
in the same way as symbolic conveniences. The claims 
of ‘similarity’ and ‘dissimilarity’ which on account of 
purely symbolic arguments {cf. Russell, Some Problems 
of Philosophy, p. 150) are often supposed to be peculiar 
are in no way different. 

In all cases, even in this case of similarity, the 
invention of non-existent entities in order to account 
for the systematic use of symbols is an illegitimate 
procedure. Were there other evidence for them not 
deriving merely from symbolic necessities ‘ it would be 

1 Grammatical exigencies It must be remembered, disconcerting 
though the fact may be, that so far from a grammar—t^ structure 
of a symbol system—being a reflection of the structure of the world, 
any supposed structure of the world is more probably a reflection of the 
grammar used There are many possible grammars and their differences 



THE CANONS OF SYMBOLISM 


97 


a different matter. As it is they stand on the same 
footing as the ‘ faculty ’ of knowing in psychology. 
The occurrence of similars does not compel us to 
recognize ‘similarity,’ a universal, any more than the 
occurrence of knowledge forces us to recognize a faculty 
of knowing. It merely compels us to recognize that 
similars do occur. That things are similar is natural 
knowledge. To make it, by exploiting the economy 
of symbolisms, into a basis of metaphysical knowledge 
—into a proof of another world of pure being where 
entities ‘subsist’ but do not exist—is unwarrantable. 
No argument about the world is valid if based merely 
upon the way a symbol system behaves.* Such argu- 

are fundamental Their several developments appear to reflect, if they 
reflect anything, the feati res of the early experiences of the races in 
which they occur, their dominant interests, their efiective organizations 
and perhaps the structure of their central nervous systems Although 
it IS true that a grammar may mirror the needs and the outlook of 
a given race, and that owing to the similarity of these needs there 
may even be a common structure in all primitive and demotic language, 
it does not follow (though it is, of course, possible) that the finely- 
meshed language most adequate to serve the needs of science would 
retain anything of this structure, or would itself directly correspond in 
structure to the structure of the world To suppose that this must be so 
IS to forget the indirectness, through reference, of the relations of 
thoughts to things These questions are further considered m Appendix 
A, on Grammar 

^ It IS interesting to compare with this argument against' umversals ' 
the view taken by the late Mr F P Ramsey of King's College, Cambridge 
(Aftnd, October, 1925, pp 404-5) " In ' Socrates is wise,' Socrates 

is the subject, wisdom the predicate But suppose we turn the pro¬ 
position round Jnd say, ‘ Wisdom is a characteristic of Socrates,' then 
wisdom formerly the predicate is now the subject Now it seems to me 
as clear as anything can be in philosophy, that the two sentences 
‘ Socrates is wise,' ' Wisdom is a characteristic of Socrates ' assert the 
same fact They are not, of course, the same sentence, but they 

have the same meaning, just as two sentences in two different languages 
can have the same meaning Which sentence we use is a matter either 
of literary style or of the point of view from which we approach the 
fact and has nothing to do with the logical nature of Socrates 
or wisdom, but is a matter entirely for grammarians " 

Mr Kamsey claims that " the above argument throws doubt upon 
the whole basis of the distinction between particular and umversal" , 
and he proceeds to " argue that nearly all philosophers, including 
Mr Russell, have been misled by language in a far more far-reaching 
way " than that of supposing that all propositions must be of the 
subject-predicate form, and " that the whole theory of particulars is 
due to mistaking for a fundamental characteristic of reality, what 
is merely a cl^acteristic of language " Yet some eighteen months 
previously, as a believer in umversaL, he wrote in the same Journal 
\M%nd, January, 1924, p. 109) of the present work that the authors 
" fail to see the existence of logical problems, and propose to replace 



98 THE MEANING OF MEANING 

merits can give knowledge only about the symbol system 
in question. This knowledge is often of great value. 
All methods of distinguishing symbols proper, 
names, from symbolic accessories are important. 

We have spoken above of reflection and refraction 
by the linguistic medium. These metaphors if carefully 
considered will not mislead. But language, though 
often spoken of as a medium of communication, is best 
regarded as an instrument; and all instruments are 
extensions, or refinements, of our sense-organs. The 
telescope, the telephone, the microscope, the microphone, 
and the galvanometer are, like the monocle or the eye 
itself, capable of distorting, that is, of introducing new 
relevant members into the contexts of our signs. And 
as receptive instruments extend our organs, so do 
manipulative instruments extend the scope of the motor 
activities. When we cannot actually point to the bears 
we have dispatched we tell our friends about them or 
draw them ; or if a slightly better instrument than 
language is at our command we produce a photograph. 
The same analogy holds for the emotive uses of 
language: words can be used as bludgeons or bodkins. 
But in photography it is not uncommon for effects due 
to the processes of manipulation to be mistaken by 
amateurs for features of the objects depicted. Some of 
these effects have been exploited by experts so as greatly 
to exercise the late Sir Arthur Conan Doyle and his 
friends.* In a similar fashion language is full of elements 
with no representative or symbolic function, due solely to 
its manipulation; these are similarly misinterpreted or 
exploited by metaphysicians and their friends so as 
greatly to exercise one another—and such of the laity 
as are prepared to listen to them. 

The fictitious entities thus introduced by language 

philosophy by * the science of symbolism ’ and psychology." The 
relegation of problems to the grammanan, however, is not the same 
thing as failure to see their existence. 

* Cf The Case agmnst Spsnt Photographs, by W. Whately Smith 
and C. V Patrick, pp. 33-36. Cf . now ( 1946 ) Mtnd, July, 1945 , p. 225 



THE CANONS OF SYMBOLISM 


99 


form a special variety of what are called fictions. But, 
as Vaihinger’s own use shows, this term is very vague 
and so-called fictions are often indistinguishable from 
hypotheses, which are simply unverified references. 
Certain abstractions, like the ‘economic man,’ are of 
this nature, though, being purely methodological, they 
are not believed in ; on the other hand, many idealiza¬ 
tions and imaginative creations, such as Don Juan and 
the Ubermensch, may some day find their referents. 
Hamlet and Goethe’s Urtier appear not to be hypotheses, 
since they are dated and placed where history has no 
room for them ; they are fictitious in the sense that 
Shakespeare or Goethe’s thought had no single referent. 
We, of course, may refer to these thoughts; more 
usually we attempt only to reproduce them. But all 
fictions of this kind must be clearly-distinguished from 
those due to manipulations of language itself. Vai- 
hinger has not sufficiently emphasized this distinction ; 
owing perhaps to an incomplete analysis of the relations 
of language and thought—shown by his use of the 
terms ‘Begriff’ and ‘begreifen’ in the discussion of 
abstractions and knowledge.^ Linguistic fictions occur 
in two ways, either through a misunderstanding of the 
function of symbolic accessories such as ‘ liberty ’ or 
‘ redness,’ so^ that in making a reference to free actions 
or red things the user supposes himself to be referring 
to something not in time and space; or through hypos- 
tatization of such connective structural machinery as 
‘ or,’ ‘ if,’ ‘ not,’ etc., to which only logicians are prone. 

The use of the term ‘concept’ is particularly mis¬ 
leading in linguistic analysis. There is a group of 
words, such as ‘conception,’ ‘perception,’ ‘excitation,’ 
which have been a perpetual source of controversy 
since the distinction between happenings inside and 
happenings outside the skin was first explicitly recog¬ 
nized. Processes of perceiving caused in an interpreter 
by the action on him of external objects have been 
^ Pktlosopkte des Ats Ob (1920), pp 51, 393. 



100 


THE MEANING OF MEANING 


commonly called ‘perceptions,’ and so, too, by a very 
intelligible confusion, discussed in our next chapter as 
the ‘ utraquistic fallacy,’ have those objects themselves. 
Other processes, more abstract or less obviously caused 
references, have similarly been called ‘conceptions.’ 
But whereas the double sense of the term ‘ perception ’ 
involves merely a confusion between two possible 
referents or sets of referents, the one inside the head 
and the other outside, the term ‘ concept ’ when thus 
duplicated has been a special inducement to the creation 
of bogus entities. It has often been assumed that the 
referents of these more abstract processes, since they 
appeared to be simple, were quite different from those 
of the mental processes which occurred when the refer¬ 
ents were ‘ given ’ in perception. A transcendental 
world of ‘ concepts ’ has therefore been envisaged by 
philosophers; while even psychologists who elected 
to call themselves ‘ conceptualists ’ in recognition of 
the fact that concepts are mental—as opposed to the 
transcendental (scholastic ‘ realist ’) or the non-psycho- 
logical (nominalist) account—have frequently been led 
by their terminology to take an inaccurate view of 
symbol situations. 

In discussions of method or of mental processes, 
‘concepts’ or abstract references may, of course, be 
themselves talked about; and in this special case words 
will properly be said to stand for ideas. But it is not 
true to say that in ordinary communication w'e are thus 
referring to our own mental machinery rather than to 
the referents which we talk ‘ about ’ by means of that 
machinery. Words, as we have seen, always symbolize 
(cf. p. ii) thoughts, and the conceptualist is apt to imply 
that the very special case of the construct or concept im¬ 
agined for the purpose of an attempted scientific refer¬ 
ence or classification, and then itself examined, can be 
generalized. He then states that the word is not a 
mere word as the nominalist holds, but stands for a 
conceptual symbol. In opposition to the believer in 



THE CANONS OF SYMBOLISM 


lOI 


a single discoverable entity for which words symbolizing 
general references stand, he is right; but by those who 
do not admit that they are talking ‘ about ’ nothing 
when they appear to have referred to unjustifiable 
entities, his vocabulary is likely to be misunderstood.^ 
Such linguistic accessories may be used without 
danger, provided they are recognized for what they are. 
They are conveniences in description, not necessities 
in the structure of things. This is shown by the fact 
that various alternatives are open to us in describing 
any referent. We can either use a grammar of ‘ sub¬ 
stantives ’ and ‘attributes’® (nouns and adjectives), 
or one of ‘Events’ and ‘Objects,’® or of ‘Place’ and 
‘Referent,’* according as we favour an Aristotelian 
outlook, or that of Modern Physics, or a pictorial ex¬ 
position of the views here advocated. To discuss such 
questions in any other spirit than that in which we 
decide between the merits of different Weed killers is 
to waste all our own time and possibly that of other 
people. 

In a similar way, from the question. What is Truth? 
an apparently insoluble problem has arisen. In 
Chapter III. however the problem was seen to be 
soluble as part of the theory of Interpretation. It will 

' Crookshank, for example. Influenza (1922), p 3. in his statement 
that Influenza is “ a universal and nothing more," has been supposed 
to be denying the occurrence of illness, though m the sequel he makes 
the implications of his attack on the medical ' realists^ quite plain. 
Cf also Supplement II 

Except in combating the very crudest transcendentalism, such a 
terminology is as injudicious as that which obliges Sapir {Language, 
p 106; cf supra. Chapter I, p 7), to speak of Concrete, Denvational, 
Concrete Relational and True Relational Concepts, when an account in 
terms of names, Imguistic accessones and referents would enable the 
fundamental distmction between thoughts, words and thmgs to be 
preserved. 

* Johnson, Lone, Part i, p 100. 

® Whitehead, The Concept of Nature, pp 77, 169 

* P 105, vnfra. It is interestmg in this connection to note that 
Indian schools of philosophy, such as the Vaifesika, at various penods 
developed logical machmery as unhke most of these Western grammars 
as they are unlike one another Prafastapada, for instance, propounded 
a theory of particularity as an independent reahty residing in eternal 
substances and distinguishing them horn one another. Othn divisions 
hardly reproducible in mteUigible terms may readily be found. 



102 


THE MEANING OF MEANING 


be convenient here to define a true Symbol as dis¬ 
tinguished from a true Reference. The definition is 
as follows;—A true symbol = one which correctly records 
an adequate ‘ reference. It is usually a set of words 
in the form of a proposition or sentence. It correctly 
records an adequate reference when it will cause a 
similar reference to occur in a suitable interpreter. 
It is false when it records an inadequate reference. 

It is often of great importance to distinguish between 
false and incorrect propositions. An incorrect symbol 
is one which in a given universe of discourse * causes 
in a suitable interpreter a reference different from that 
symbolized in the speaker. Thus if we say,“ Charles I. 
died in his bed, making witty remarks,” ouf symbol 
is more likely to be incorrect than our reference false, for 
it IS no rash suggestion that the referent is Charles II.’s 
death in kts bed. But in many cases such an audacious 
exegetic is unwarranted, and it will then be a more 
difficult matter to decide which is occurring. In the 
opposite case when, e.g., we say, “The sun is trying 
to come out,” or “The mountain rises,” we may clearly 
be making no different references than if we were to 
give a scientific description of the situation, but we may 
mean these assertions to be taken ‘ literally.’ By taking 
an assertion literally is meant interpreting our symbols 
as primary symbols, t.e., as names used with a reference 
fixed by a given universe of discourse. When for any 
reason, such as poverty of language, no symbol is 
at hand we can choose a symbol whose referent is 

1 It IS useful in Engli^ to have a term such as ‘ adequacy ' by 
which to distinguish the sense m which a symbol may be true from 
that in which a reference is true In such sentences as " What he said 
was untrue,” the ambiguities are obvious , we are left uncertain whether 
his symbol or his reference was false In more subtle cases, where 
the word ' proposition ' is casually introduced confusions often arise 
which without this distinction are hard to disentanrie. The term 
' adequacy ' has the advantage of suggesting the difficult question 
whether and in what sense reference is capable of degree, 

^ A Umverse of discourse is a collection of occasions on which we 
communicate by means of symbols For different universes of dis¬ 
course diffenng degrees of accuracy are sufficient, and (cf Chapter VI., 
p III) new defimtions may be required. 



THE CANONS OF SYMBOLISM 103 

analogous to our referent and transfer this symbol. 
Then if the speaker fails to see that such symbols are 
metaphorical or approximative only, t.e., takes them 
literally, falsity arises, namely the correct symboliza¬ 
tion of a false reference by which the interpreter could 
be misled. If on the other hand the speaker makes 
a true reference, but uses symbols such that a suitable 
interpreter, rightly interpreting, makes a false reference, 
then the symbol is incorrect. 

Incorrectness may plainly have degrees, for if, when 
my pipe is out, I say, “My pipe is alight,” then this 
symbol, “ My pipe is alight,” is sufficiently correct to 
characterize its referent but not to place it. In other 
words. It is good enough for the investigator to be able 
to look for its referent among events, and to exclude it 
on tbe ground that the place it claims is filled by the 
referent of “ My pipe is out.” It may also be good 
enough, according to the actual context, for him to go 
and look for it among other likely orders of referents, 
gustatory, olfactory and thermal sensations, images and 
so forth. If he can find it he may be able to expand 
the incorrect symbol, possibly changing every word in 
the process. Similarly, once convinced that my pipe is 
out, I may be able myself to expand my symbol to “ My 
pipe feels as though it were alight.” 

A group of questions arise out of this instance, 
which require a Fourth Canon, the Canon of Actuality, 
to clarify the situation :— 

IV.— A symbol refers to what it is actually used to 
refer to, not necessarily to what it ought in 
good usage, or is intended by an interpreter, or 
IS intended by the user to refer to 

The assertion considered above may or may not have 
referred to a referent like that for which it would be 
correctly used. I may admit or deny that my referent 
was some feeling and not burning tobacco. Accord¬ 
ingly, by Canon 1 ., we have here a group of symbols 



THE MEANING OF MEANING 


104 

appearing to be one symbol, and we must select that 
which is actually being used. When we cannot so 
select, nothing more can be done beyond framing a 
collection of unambiguous symbols for future use in 
analogous cases.^ But suppose that we were led to 
state, after the manner of formal logicians, that a 
referent such as ‘ non-existent combustion of tobacco ’ 
is involved, we should appear to be confronted by a 
problem as to how we can refer to what is not there 
to be referred to. This problem, which is of no in¬ 
terest in itself, is mentioned here because it is typical 
of the difficulties which arise through treatijjig an in¬ 
complete system of defective symbols as though it were 
a complete system of perfect symbols. Within a minor 
system of symbols which has been wrought into a high 
degree of complexity, such contradictions, if they ensue 
from a legitimate manipulation of symbols, are a helpful 
indication of some imperfection still remaining. Mathe¬ 
matics is a case in point. Faced with such a contradiction, 
the mathematician proceeds to improve his symbolism, 
and we should follow his example rather than suppose 
that we have proved some curious eccentricity in the 
universe. 

Two other questions arise which deserve an answer. 
The first is “ How do we know that ‘ pipe alight now ’ 
claims the same place as ‘ pipe out now,’ while ‘ pipe 
foul now’ does not?” The answer is, in the words of 
the old tale, “ By experience.” We possess in familiar 
fields vast accumulations of such knowledge. We 
know, for instance, that ‘ x is green ’ and ‘ x is red ’ 
and ‘x is blue’ all claim the same place for their 
referents; as do ‘x is dark’ and ‘x is light.’ We 
also know that ‘ x is green ’ and ‘ x is dark ’ and ‘ x is 
vivid ’ do not make conflicting claims. In fields with 
which we are unfamiliar the main difficulty is pre- 

^ To the technique required tor this operation Chapters VI and 
VII. are devoted, and in Chapter IX, the methods developed are appbed 
to the arch-ambiguity. Meaning. 



THE CANONS OF SYMBOLISM 105 

cisely in gaining' such knowledge. We need this know¬ 
ledge in order to perfect our symbols, just as we need 
perfected symbols in order to advance our knowledge. 

The other question is, “Why not say that since no 
referent for ‘My pipe is out’ was to be found where 
we were led to look for it, there was no referent? ” 
But there was a reference—though not to the referent 
suggested at first sight. The problem of finding the 
actual referent is here, as always, that of tracing out the 
causal connections or contexts involved, in the manner 
indicated in Chapter III. 

One special difficulty with regard to complex symbols 
calls for a Canon whose functions may not be evident 
at first sight, though it is necessary for the avoidance 
of nonsense in our discourse. It concerns the build¬ 
ing up of complex symbols from those which are simple 
or less complex. It is plain that if we incorporate in 
one symbol signs which claim the same place, whether 
eg.i colour (red—yellow) or shape (round—square), our 
proposed symbol is void. This Fifth Canon is called 
the Canon of Compatibility :— 

V.— No complex symbol may contain constituent 
symbols which claim the same 'place.' 

It is therefore important at once to make clear what 
is done when a symbol ‘ places ’ a referent. Since the 
days of Aristotle, three formulae, traditionally known 
as the Laws of Thought, have received much attention, 
civil and uncivil, from logicians. They have been 
variously interpreted as laws which the mind obeys but 
which things need not, as laws which things obey but 
which the mind need not, as laws which all things (the 
mind included) obey, or as laws which nothing need 
obey but which logic finds strangely useful. For 
Symbolism they become a triad of minor Canons which 
help to keep the Cathedral of Symbolism in due order. 
First comes the Law of identity—quaintly formulated 
as ‘ A is A ’; a symbol is what it is j i.e.. Every symbol 



io6 THE MEANING OF MEANING 

k<ts a referent. The second is the Law of Contradic¬ 
tion—‘ A is not not-A ’; no symbol refers to what it does 
not refer to; z.e., No referent has more than one place 
in the whole order of referents. The third is the Law 
of Excluded Middle—‘A is either B or not B’; a sym¬ 
bol must have a given referent or some other; i.e.y 
Every referent has a fixed place in the whole order of 
rrferents. For this triad, by Canon IL we may sub¬ 
stitute the following formula, which is then the Sixth 
Canon of Symbolism: The Canon of Individuality— 

VI.— All possible referents together form an order, 
such that every referent has one place only in that order. 

One difficulty with regard to ‘ place ’ may be usefully 
commented on. It is rather a symbolic accessory (cf. 
p. 94 above) than an actual symbol. In any false 
assertion, we have implied, two things must be clearly 
distinguished (i) the referent to which we are actually 
referring (2) an alleged referent to which we believe 
ourselves to be referring. Only the first of these has a 
* place ’ in the whole order of referents. 

We can, using alternative language, say either that 
in a false assertion we are believing a referent to be in 
a ‘ place ’ in which it is not, or that we are believing 
ourselves to be referring to a different, referent from 
that to which we are actually referring. We can for 
instance either say that in two contradictory assertions 
we are referring to the same referent but assigning to it 
different ‘ places,’ or we can say that we are referring to 
two different referents and assigning them to the same 
‘ place.’ These alternative locutions involve subtle 
shifts in the references using both ‘ referent’ and ‘ place,’ 
and accentuate the important consideration that the 
distinction between the reference of these terms is 
merely artificial. There is no difference between a 
referent and its place. There can be no referent out 
of a place, and no place lacking a referent. When a 
referent is known its place also is known, and a place 



THE CANONS OF SYMBOLISM 


107 

can only be identified by the referent which fills it. 
* Place,’ that is, is merely a symbol introduced as a 
convenience for describing those imperfections in 
reference which constitute falsity. 

We have shown that for all references, between the 
referent and the act there are always intervening sign- 
situations. In the simplest case, that of the true direct 
judgment of perception, there may be only one such sign- 
situation (discussed in Chapter III.). In a false propo¬ 
sition there will be a similar sign chain with the 
difference that some misinterpretation occurs. It is not 
however always necessary in order to translate a false 
proposition into a true one to discover where the mis¬ 
interpretation occurred ; a new sign chain abutting on 
the same referent may be substituted. In expansion, 
however, such discovery is necessary, and the difficulty 
explains our preference for Translation over Expansion. 
In education and controversy the discovery of the 
misinterpretation is usually the more essential step. 

In these six Canons, Singularity, Expansion, Defini¬ 
tion, Actuality, Compatibility, and Individuality, we 
have the fundamental axioms, which determine the 
right use of Words in Reasoning. We have now a 
compass by the aid of which we may explore new 
fields with some prospect of avoiding circular motion. 
We may begin to order the symbolic levels and in¬ 
vestigate the process of interpretation, the ‘goings- 
on’ in the minds of interpreters. In particular it will 
be possible now, though not always easy, to show 
when a symbol is merely an abbreviation ; and to 
specify the various kinds of definition suitable on dif¬ 
ferent occasions. It might not seem unreasonable in 
the meantime to call a halt in such discussions as would 
be affected by these discoveries— 

“Seal up the mouth of outrage for a while 
Till we can clear these ambiguities, 

And know their sprmg, their head, their true descent." 



io8 THE MEANING OF MEANING 

These Canons control the System of Symbols known 
as Prose. If by themselves they do not prove sufficient 
to keep our speech from betraying us, any others which 
may be required will be of the same nature. A set of 
symbols will only be well organized, or form a good 
prose style, when it respects these Canons. Only such 
a set will allow us to perform with safety those trans¬ 
formations and substitutions of symbols by which 
scientific language endeavours to reflect and record its 
distinctions and conclusions—those operations which, 
as we have seen, appeared to primitive man to partake 
of the nature of magic. Moreover, only such a set 
will enable the philosopher to discuss more important 
matters than his own or his colleagues’ peculiarities of 
expression. 



CHAPTER VI 


THE THEORY OF DEFINITION 

The first cause of absurd conclusions I ascribe to 
the want of method ; in that they begin not their 
ratiocination from defimtions — Hobbes. 

" Do, as a concession to my poor wits, hard 
Darlington, )ust explain to me what you really 
mean ”—" I think I had better not. Duchess. 
Nowadays to be intelligible is to be found out "— 

Lady Windermere's Fan. 

There is at present no theory of Definition capable 
of practical application under normal circumstances. 
The traditional theory, in so far as it has not been lost 
in the barren subtleties of Genus and Differentia, and in 
the confusion due to the term ‘ Connotation,’ has made 
little progress — chiefly on account of the barbarous 
superstitions ^ about language which have gathered on 

* The Magic of Names is often potent where we should least expect 
it, and the distress of Sachs on the discovery of Uranus, which found 
expression in hi^ query—" What guarantee have we that the planet 
regarded by astronomers as Uranus is really Uranus ^ "—is onfy one 
degree more primitive than Herbert Spencer's contention that " By 
comparing its meamngs in different connections, and observing what 
they have in common, we learn the essential meaning of a word , let 
us thus ascertain the meaning of the words ‘ good,' " etc 

The italics are ours, and no one who does not believe with Nansen's 
Greenland Eskimos " that there is a spiritual affinity between two 
people of the same name," can fail to see the futility of such attempts 
to define by Essence The doctrine derives from the view already 
referred to that words are in some way parts of things (a charge which 
Spencer himself, curiously enough, brings elsewhere against Greek 
speculation in general) If, as was supposed everything has its proper 
name, the existence of a name enables us to look with confidence for 
the thing or ‘ idea ' to which it belongs, and, m general, things possessing 
the same name will have something in common which the process of 
definition must endeavour to find. The search for the quiddity of 
things, the hacceitas, as Duns Scotus called it, probably has its origin 
in the same attitude to Words, though it is unfair to attribute to Aristotle 
the linguistic absurdities of his followers Some of the most curious 
implications of these traditions, both in the history of philosophy 

lOS 



no THE MEANING OF MEANING 

the confines of logic from the earliest times. Four 
difficulties have stood in the way and must first be 
removed. 

Firstly, do we define things or words? To decide 
this point we have only to notice that if we speak about 
defining words we refer to something very different from 
what IS referred to, meant, by ‘ defining things.’ When 
we define words we take another set of words which may 
be used with the same referent as the first, i.e., we sub¬ 
stitute a symbol which will be better understood in a 
given situation. With things, on the other hand, no 
such substitution is involved. A so-called definition of 
a horse as opposed to the definition of the word ‘ horse,’ 
is a statement about it enumerating properties by means 
of which it may be compared with and distinguished 
from other things. There is thus no rivalry between 
‘ verbal ’ and ‘ real ’ definitions.* 

The words by means of which these properties are 
enumerated do, of course, give us a substitute symbol— 
either a complete analysis, or as abbreviated by classi- 
ficatory methods (the usual ‘ genus and differentia ’ type) 
—with the same referent (the horses) as the original 
symbol ; but rather by way of corollary than as the 
main purpose of the analysis. Moreover, this process 
is only possible with complex objects which have been 
long studied by some science. With simple objects, or 
those which for lack of investigation are not known to 
be analysable, as well as with everything to which 
classificatory methods have not yet been applied, such 
a method is clearly not available, and here other symbols 
must be found as the substitutes which symbol-definition 
seeks to provide. Such, in outline, is the solution of 
the long-standing dispute between the advocates of real 
and symbolic definitions. 

and m the most recent develraments of logic, are admirably treated 
by Professor L Rougier in his Paralogtsmes du Jiattonahsme, pp 146 S., 
368 fi , 386 fi 

* See Leibmtz, New Essays concerning Human Understanding, 1916, 
pp 316-7, for an example of the way in which the distinction b^n 
envisaged 



THE THEORY OF DEFINITION 


III 


The second difficulty is closely related to the above. 
Though definition be symbol-substitution, definitions 
have usually, for grammatical reasons, to be stated in 
a form which makes them appear to be about things. 
This is because we are in the habit of abbreviating such 
symbols as "the word ‘ fire’ refers to the same referent 
as the words ‘what burns’” to " fire is what burns” ; 
and of saying “ Chten means ‘ dog,’” when we ought to 
say " the word chten and the word ‘dog’ both mean the 
same animal.”^ 

Thirdly, all definitions are essentially ad hoc. They 
are relevant to some purpose or situation, and con¬ 
sequently are applicable only over a restricted field or 
‘universe of discourse.’ For some definitions, those of 
physics, for instance, this universe is very wide. Thus 
for the physicist ‘ energy' is a wider term than for the 
schoolmaster, since the pupil whose report is marked 
"without energy” is known to the physicist as possessing 
it in a variety of forms. Whenever a term is thus taken 
outside the universe of discourse for which it has been 
defined, it becomes a metaphor, and may be in need 
of fresh definition. Though there is more in metaphor 
than this, we have here an essential feature of symbolic 
metaphorical language. The distinction between this 
and emotive metaphorical language is discussed later at 
pages 239-40. 

Fourthly there is the problem of ‘intensive’ as 
opposed to ‘ extensive ’ definition which comes to a head 
with the use of the terms ‘denote’and ‘connote.’ In 
Chapter IX. the artificiality of these distinctions will be 
urged. Here it is only necessary to point out that two 
symbols may be said to have the same connotation when 

* It may be noted that when we say *' Fire burns ’’ we appear to 
be conveying information about fire and not about symbols, whereas 
with such a combination of synonyms as " Chten is ‘ dog ’ " we seem 
unable to advance the knowledge of anyone This is because in saying 
" Fire burns," ‘ fire ’ and ‘ burns ’ are used with differing definitions 
If we defined chten as " domestic wolf-like animal ” and ‘ dog ’ as 
" barking quadruped " we could say " Chten is ' dog' " (=" Dogs 
bark ”), winch would convey information 



II 2 


THE MEANING OF MEANING 


they symbolize the same reference. An intensive or 
connotative definition will be one which involves no 
change in those characters of a referent in virtue of 
which It forms a context with its original sign. In an 
extensive definition there may be such change. In other 
words when we define intensively we keep to the same 
sign-situation for definiendum and definiens, when we 
define extensively this may be changed. 

We are now in a position to grapple with the 
difference between definitions and ordinary assertions. 
“Gorillas are animals” and “Gorillas are affable’’are 
unlike one another in the respect that the first appears 
to be certainly true as soon as we understand it, while 
the'second may be doubted. From “ This is a gorilla” 
it follows directly that “This is an animal,” but not 
that it is an affable one. If we look for a distinction in 
essential connection between animality and gorillarity 
on the one hand, and gorillarity and affability on the 
other we shall make but indifferent use of our leisure. 
But if the difference be sought in its proper place, that 
is, between or in^ the references, it will be found that 
the definition actually used in the first case includes 
animal, so that in speaking of a gorilla we have spoken 
of an animal, and are therefore able to refer again with¬ 
out diffidence to what we have already referred to ; while 
affability was not so included. The relevant definition, 
in fact, is the one actually used.® 

^ As a typical bogus question we might ask Where does difference 
Reside ’ 

* This point has its bearing upon the controversy as to whether 
relations, all or some, are internal or external An Internal relation 
would seem to be a defining relation, and any relation used as such 
to be internal ‘ Internal ’ and ‘ defining ’ are thus synonyms, e g , 
the relation of whole to part, since a whole is automatically defined 
as containing its parts, is internal, and similarly if a part be defined 
as contained iii a whole, the relation of part to whole An External 
relation is any relation other than a defining relation If Prof G E. 
Moore's relation ‘ entails ' (Phtlosophtcal Studies, p 291) were a relation 
of substitution, partial or complete, between symbols, based upon 
identity of reference, then this account of internal relations would 
not differ greatly from that given by Prof Moore It is, however, 
exceptionally difficult to discover what the several parties to this 
controversy are asserting , and indeed each is apt to lament his inability 
to understand the others 



THE THEORY OF DEFINITION 


113 

To attempt now a fresh attack upon the essential 
problem of how we define, or attain the substitute 
symbols required in any discussion. We know* that 
‘ A symbol refers to what it has actually been used to 
refer to.’ We shall cease then to assume that people are 
referring to what they ‘ought’ to have referred to, and 
consider only what they actually do refer to. The point 
to be met in every discussion is the point actually 
advanced, which must be first understood. We have, 
that is, in all cases to find the referent. How can this 
best be done ? 

The answer is simple and obvious. Find first, it 
runs, a set of referents which is certainly common to 
all concerned, about which agreement can be secured, 
and locate the required referent through its connection 
with these. 

It is fortunate that the types of fundamental con¬ 
nections with which discussions are concerned are few 
in number, though we are apt to believe, such is the 
multifarious complexity of our talk, that things are 
connected in any number of ways. Whether this 
poverty is due to the trammelling influence of language, 
a larger number of connections being quite, not merely 
partially, unmanageable by naive talkers, whether it 
is due to the structure of the brain, or whether it is due 
to an actual simplicity in the universe, need not here 
be considered. For practical purposes the fundamental 
connections which can be used in definition are limited 
to those which the normal mind can think of when 
directly named. Let us consider, for instance, the 
growth of the abstraction which we name a spatial 
relation. In all our references to spatial objects certain 
common elements or strands are active. Originally to 
think of space as opposed to spatial objects we had to 
think in rapid succession of a variety of spatial objects 
in order that the common elements in the references 
should stand out. In time we became able to use these 


^ By Canon IV.—Chapter V 



THE MEANING OF MEANING 


114 

common, i.e.^ general references independently without 
requiring them to be built up anew on each occasion. 
We are now able to use them merely upon the vicarious 
stimulus of the symbol ‘ spatial relation.’ A normal 
mind, however, except in the few cases in which such 
abstractions have universal value, still requires the aid 
of instances, analogies and metaphors. The fewness 
of these abstractions saves the linguistic situation. If 
we employed, say, a hundred radically different types 
of connections (still a small number) the task of limit¬ 
ing the misunderstandings due to the variety in our 
references would have proved impossible. 

The fundamental connections being thus so few, 
the task of a theory of definition narrows itself down to 
the framing of a list. All possible referents are con¬ 
nected in one or other, or several, of these fundamental 
ways with referents which we can all succeed in identify¬ 
ing. We must not assume in referring to any given 
fixed point of agreement from which we find we are 
able to start that we do more than agree in identifying 
this. We must be careful to introduce our starting- 
points in such a way that they do not raise fresh problems 
on their own account. That is to say, we must select 
them with reference to the particular universe of dis¬ 
course in which our definienda fall. Thus, if we wish 
to indicate what we are referring to when we use the 
word ‘ Beauty ’ we should proceed by picking out certain 
starting-points, such as nature, pleasure, emotion, or 
truth, and then saying that what we refer to by 
‘ Beauty’ is anything lying in a certain relation (imitating 
nature, causing pleasure or emotion, revealing truth) to 
these points. How this may be done is shown in detail 
in the following chapter. 

When someone asks where Cambridge Circus is, we 
say, “You know where the British Museum is, and 
you know the way down Shaftesbury Avenue. If you 
go down Shaftesbury Avenue you will come to it.” 
We may note— 



THE THEORY OF DEFINITION 115 

(1) The starting-point must be familiar, and this 
can in practice only be guaranteed when it is either 
something with which we are directly, not symbolically 
acquainted (we do not merely know its name), or some¬ 
thing with a wide and vague extension involving no 
ambiguity in the context in which it is used. Thus 
anyone in Kensington Gardens with a quarter of an 
hour to spare and a desire to view Cambridge Circus, 
if told that the said Circus is beyond Leicester Square, 
will postpone his visit as readily as if he were told 
(equally vaguely for another purpose) that it is in Soho. 

(2) For the stricter purposes we shall almost always 
require starting-points taken outside the speech situation; 
things, that is, which we can point to or experience. 
In this way we can utilize in our symbols the advantages 
of gesture languages mentioned above. Thus it is 
easier to point to an Antimacassar, when one of these 
safeguards is present, than to describe it. 

The importance of starting-points having thus been 
indicated, namely, to act as signs by which the required 
referents may be reached, we may now enumerate some 
of the main routes which are useful in finding our way 
about the field of reference. The sign-situations here 
involved, we must not forget, arise only through and 
upon many other simpler interpretations of the kind 
discussed in the preceding chapters. It is easy 
symbolically to make the situation which arises when 
we define appear simple, but if we realize the delicacy 
of the processes and adaptations required we shall not 
place overmuch trust in face-value comparisons of 
symbols (the usual method), but will attempt instead 
to consider what actually is happening. 

When in a discussion we are asked, ‘ Can you 
define your terms ? ’ or complain ‘ I do not understand 
what you mean by the words you use,’ we endeavour 
to discover some route by which understanding, i.e,^ 
identification of referents, may be secured. 

A person thoroughly acquainted with his subject 



ii6 THE MEANING OF MEANING 

and with the technique of Definition should be able, 
like the man up aloft in a maze, to direct travellers 
from all quarters to any desired point; and it may be 
added that to go up the ladder and overlook the maze 
is by far the best method of mastering a subject. 

Although in no case, as we have already seen, are 
relations to be regarded as part of the stuff of nature, 
and although when we appear to speak of them we are 
merely using them as tools, which does not involve 
actual referents corresponding to them, yet when they 
are so used there are various distinctions which it is 
desirable to make as a matter of convenience. At the 
beginning of our inquiry we described the relation 
which could be said to hold between symbol and 
referent as an imputed relation. To have described it 
simply as an indirect relation would have omitted the 
important difference between indirect relations recog¬ 
nized as such, and those wrongly treated as direct. 
Thus the relation between grandfather and grandson 
is much more indirect than that between father and son, 
and can be analysed into two paternal relations—‘ being 
the father of the father (or mother) of.’ Few people 
would suppose that a direct relation was here involved, 
since all family relations are highly indirect. But love, 
hate, friendship, sympathy, etc., are very commonly 
spoken of and regarded as direct, though on examina¬ 
tion their indirectness is at once discovered. The whole 
of social psychology is, however, infested with imputed 
relations of this type, for an explanation of which such 
hypotheses as that of group-consciousness are often 
invoked 

The distinction between simple and complex rela¬ 
tions on the other hand is somewhat different. In¬ 
directness is only one kind of complexity, and direct 
relations need not be simple. For instance, the relation 
of ‘ being a benevolent uncle to ’ is complex; it is a 
blend of the two relations ‘well disposed towards’ 
and ‘ avuncularity.’ The similarity between one pea 



THE THEORY OF DEFINITION 117 

and another is complex, being a blend of similarities 
in respect of greenness, hardness, edibility, etc. These 
considerations, elementary though they may appear, 
are of use whenever we have to treat of relations. 

The routes, then, which we seek in our endeavour 
to reach a desired referent are the obvious relations 
in which that referent stands to some known referent. 
The number of possible relations is indefinitely large, 
but those which are of practical use fortunately fall, 
as we have already explained, into a small number of 
groups. So that as a prehminary classification* we get 
such a list as this :— 

I. Symbolization 

This is the simplest, most fundamental way of 
defining. If we are asked what ‘orange’ refers to, 
we may take some object which is orange and say 
“ ‘ Orange’ is a symbol which stands for This.” Here 
the relation which we use in defining is the relation 
discussed in Chapter I. as constituting the base of our 
triangle. It is, as we mentioned, an imputed relation 
reducible to a relation between symbol and act of 
reference and a relation between act of reference and 
referent. Our starting-point is the word ‘ orange,’ 
our route of identification is this relation. The required 
referent is This. What wq are doing in fact here is 
directly naming. 

But, it will be said. This merely tells us that 
‘orange’ is applicable in one case; what we wish to 
know is how it is applicable in general; we wish to 
have the definition extended so as to cover ail the 
referents for which ‘orange’ is a suitable symbol. 
This generalization may be performed for all types 
of definitions in the same manner by the use of 
similarity relations. We may say “ ‘Orange’ applies 
to this and to all things similar in respect of colour to 
this.” In practice the discrimination of one similarity 
relation from others generally requires the use of 

’ Cf. further Ptyehe, V<4 X, No 3, Januarv, 1930. pp 9 and 29 



ii8 THE MEANING OF MEANING 

parallel instances, analogies in fact, of the simplest 
order. 

2. Similarity 

Thus similarity itself may be used as a defining 
relation. Our required referent is a chosen referent. 
If we are asked what the symbol ‘ orange ’ refers to, 
we may define this symbol by taking something which 
isorange and saying “To anything which is like this 
thing in respect of colour the symbol ‘ orange ’ is 
applicable.” Here we have substituted for ‘orange’ 
‘like this in respect of colour,’ and the referents of 
both symbols are the same. Our starting-point is 
This and the relation is Likeness, and anyone who 
knows what ‘This’ stands for (i.r., is not blind) and 
knows what ‘ Likeness ’ stands for will get there. 

3. Spatial Relations 

In, On, Above, Between, Beside, To the right of. 
Near, Bigger than. Part of, are obvious examples. 
“‘Orange’ is a symbol for the colour of the region 
between red and yellow in a spectrum (and of any 
colour like this).” It will be noted that the naming 
relation is involved in this as in every definition, and 
that the definition is always extendable by a similarity 
relation. It is curious that some of these symbols for 
spatial relations are unsymmetrical. Thus we have 
‘ on ’ = ‘ above and in contact with,’ but no abbreviation 
for ‘ under and in contact with,’ except such ambiguous 
words as ‘supporting.’ We may further note that 
most of the common uses of ‘ on ’ are so strangely 
metaphorical that it has even been doubted whether 
there is not some simple unanalysable relation which has 
not yet been noticed. The right approach to problems 
of metaphorical extension will be considered later in 
this chapter. 

4. Temporal Relations 

‘ Yesterday ’ is the day before to-day ; ‘ Sunday ’ 



THE THEORY OF DEFINITION 


119 

is the first day of the week; ‘ The end of the war ’ 
is X months after event y ; ‘ Lighting-up time ’ is x 
minutes after sunset. 

5. Causation: Physical 

‘Thunder’ is what is caused (not by two clouds 
bumping but) by certain electrical disturbances. ‘ Saw¬ 
dust ’ is what is produced, etc. 

6 . Causation, Psychological 

‘The Unconscious’ is what causes dreams, fugues, 
psychoses, humour and the rest. ‘ Pleasure ’ is ‘ the 
conscious accompaniment of successful psychic activity.’ 

7. Causation Psycho-physical 

In addition to the examples given in the following 
chapter in connection with Beauty, we may define 
‘ A perception of orange ’ as ‘ the effect in consciousness 
of certain vibrations falling on the retina.’ 

Causal relations are probably the routes of identi¬ 
fication most commonly employed in general discussion, 
as well as in science. Thus a view of great historical 
consequence defines the Deity as the Cause of the 
Universe, while the importance of Embryology in 
zoological classification is due to the causal defining 
relations which are thereby provided. 

• 

8. Being the Object of a Mental State 

The right-hand side of our triangle, Referring, is 
one of these ; so are Desiring, Willing, Feeling, etc. 
Thus ‘ Piteous things ’ may be defined as those towards 
which we feel pity, and ‘ Good things ’ are those which 
we approve of approving. 

9. Common Complex Relations 

Some definitions are most conveniently formulated 
in complex form. While capable of being analysed 
out into sets of simple relations falling under one or 
other of the above headings, they are more readily 
applicable as popularly symbolized. 



120 THE MEANING OF MEANING 

Examples are ‘ utility ’ (analysable into Nos. 7 and 
8), ‘ Imitation ’ (2 and 7), ‘ Implication ’ (i and 8). 

10. Legal Relations 

These are so frequently employed and implied, 
though often disguised, that it seems worth while to 
give them a separate heading; moreover, they are 
subject to an arbitrary test—satisfying the judge. 

Examples: ‘Belonging to’ (when = ‘owned by’), 
‘Subject of,’ ‘Liable to,’ ‘Evidence of.’ All le^al 
definitions are highly complex, though none the less 
serviceable. 

The above relations are those which considerable 
experience has shown to be commonly employed in 
definitions. Any other relations which might be re¬ 
quired for special purposes equally deserve to be 
included in a complete hst—^Shape, Function, Purpose’, or 
Opposition, for example It is therefore neither claimed 
that the first eight groups exhaust the relevant elementary 
relations, nor that those complex relations which we 
have cited can be reduced without remainder to relations 
of these types. The whole classification is on a prag¬ 
matic basis, and merely on the level of the most usual 
universes of discourse. 

It has also proved unnecessary to discuss whether 
and in what sense all relations may be logically 
reducible to one or more ultimate kinds,^ for any such 
reduction would make no difference to the value of the 
definitions we have been considering in their appro¬ 
priate field. Even definitions of considerable com¬ 
plexity, involving a variety of theories, can be reduced 
without difficulty to discussable morsels, and their 
validity as substitutes the better examined. This further 
illustrates the fact that definitions often go by stages, 
as when our inquirer for Cambridge Circus is not 

* Thus, on Alexander's hypothesis, for instance {Space, Time 
and Deity, I , p 239), " in the end all relation 15 reducible to spatio- 
temporal terms " 



THE THEORY OF DEFINITION 


I2I 


familiar with the British Museum and requires first 
to be directed thither via the Tube from the Marble 
Argh. 

The question of multiple relations raises no diffi¬ 
culty in this connection. A multiple relation holds 
between a number of terms greater than two. Thus, 
Perceiving, as Dr Whitehead has recently insisted, 
is a multiple relation holding between a percipient, 
an object, and the conditions ; and Giving is a multiple 
relation holding between a philanthropist, a donation, 
and a beneficiary. In defining any of these terms, or 
in taking any of them as a starting-point for a route 
of definition, we proceed in exactly the same fashion 
as with dual relations—except that bearings must be 
taken from more than one landmark, when the universe 
of discourse demands special accuracy. Othenvise 
the Definiendum is not reached. Thus, in defining 
some object as what so-and-so saw, it may on some 
occasions be necessary to state the conditions—as in 
a seance we need to know the strictness of the test; 
or in identifying a passing train as an Express we have 
to consider the speed of our own train. But much 
discussion can be profitably undertaken without such 
complex situations arising. 

The practical aspect of the above list of routes of 
definition deserves to be insisted upon. The reason 
for using definitions at all is practical. We use them 
to make discussion more profitable, to bring different 
thinkers into open agreement or disagreement with 
one another. There is, it is true, a more recondite 
use of definition derived from this simple primitive 
use. Definitions are of great importance in the 
construction of deductive, scientific systems, those 
automatic thinking-machines for which logic and 
mathematics are, as it were, the rules or instructions. 
In such a deductive system as mechanics, for example, 
it is through the definitions employed that the parts 
of the symbolic system are linked together, so that a 



122 THE MEANING OF MEANING 

given manipulation of the symbolism will yield com¬ 
parable results even when their precise nature is not 
foreseen by the manipulator. Thus, for such systems 
there comes to be something which is regarded as the 
definition of a particular symbol. Given the system, 
there will be one and only one definition of a symbol 
which is the right or proper definition, in the sense that 
the working of the system depends upon the employ¬ 
ment of this definition. 

Specialists who are much concerned with such 
systems naturally tend to regard all definitions in 
the same manner. Yet for many of the most in¬ 
teresting topics of discussion a quite different atti¬ 
tude and habit of mind as regards definitions is not 
only desirable, but, in fact, necessary, if fruitful 
discussion is to be possible. In aesthetics, politics, 
psychology, sociology, and so forth, the stage of 
systematic symbolization with its fixed and unalter¬ 
able definitions has not been reached. Such studies 
as these are not far enough advanced for anyone yet 
to decide which system is most advantageous and 
least likely to exclude important aspects. The most 
highly systematized sciences are those which deal 
with the simplest aspects of nature. The more diffi¬ 
cult and to many people, naturally, the more attractive 
subjects are still in a stage in which it is an open 
question which symbolization is most desirable. At 
this stage what has chiefly to be avoided is the veiled 
and hidden strife between rival systems in their early 
forms, which more than anything else prevents mutual 
understanding even between those who may be in 
agreement. Many terms used in discussions where 
‘ faith,’ ‘ beautiful,’ ‘ freedom,’ ‘ good,’ ‘ belief,’ ‘energy,’ 
‘justice,’ ‘the State’ constantly occur are used with 
no distinct reference, the speaker being guided merely 
by his linguistic habits and a simple faith in the 
widespread possession of these habits. Hence the 
common sight of anger aroused by the hearer’s apparent 



THE THEORY OF DEFINITION 123 

obtuseness and wrong-headedness “where the matter 
is surely self-evident.” 

But even in those rarer discussions in which the 
speakers are capable of greater explicitness, the curious 
instinctive tendency to believe that a word has its own 
true or proper use, which we have seen has its roots 
in magic, too often prevents this ability to produce 
definitions from taking effect. No doubt other factors 
are involved. Lack of practice, literary fetishes con¬ 
cerning elegance of diction, reluctance to appear 
pedantic, defensive mimicry and other protective uses 
of language all contribute. But far more important 
than these is the instinctive attitude to words as natural 
containers of power, which has, as we have shown, from 
the dawn of language been assumed by mankind, and 
is still supported and encouraged by all the earlier 
stages of education. 

The correction for this persistent tendency is a 
greater familiarity with the more common routes of 
definition, and a lively sense, which might easily be 
awakened as a part of education, that our use of any 
given word to stand for our referent on any occasion 
is not due to any particular fitness of the word for that 
particular referent, but is determined by all sorts of odd 
accidents of our own history. We ought to regard 
communication as a difficult matter, and close corre¬ 
spondence of reference for different thinkers as a 
comparatively rare event. It is never safe to assume 
that it has been secured unless both the starting-points 
and the routes of definition, whereby the referents of 
at least a majority of the symbols employed have been 
reached, are known. 

In this chapter we are, for the sake of simplicity, 
confining our attention to reference alone. In actual 
discussion terms are used at least as much for the sake 
of their suasory and emotive effects as for their strictly 
symbolic value. Any substitute for ‘ beautiful,’ for 
example, inevitably falls so flatly and heavily that 



124 


THE MEANING OF MEANING 


many people prefer to use the term with all its dangers 
rather than the psychological jargon which they may 
agree is more satisfactory from a scientific as opposed 
to an emotive point of view. 

It is often, indeed, impossible to decide, whether a 
particular use of symbols is primarily symbolic or 
emotive. This is especially the case with certain kinds 
of metaphor. When the Psalmist cries of his enemies, 
“They have sharpened their tongues like a serpent; 
adders’ poison is under their lips,” it is hard to 
determine whether an elusive similarity between the 
reptile and the persons he is describing is enabling him 
metaphorically to state something about them, or 
whether the sole function of his utterance is not to 
express his abhorrence of them and to promote similar 
attitudes towards them in his hearers. Most terms of 
abuse and endearment raise this problem, which, as a 
rule, it IS, fortunately, not important to settle. The 
distinction which is important is that between utterances 
in which the symbolic function is subordinate to the 
emotive act and those of which the reverse is true. In 
the first case, however precise and however elaborate 
the references communicated may be, they can be seen 
to be present in an essentially instrumental capacity, 
as means to emotive effects. In the second case, how¬ 
ever strong the emotive effects, these can be seen to 
be by-products not essentially involved in the speech 
transaction. The peculiarity of scientific statement, 
that recent new development of linguistic activity, is 
its restriction to the symbolic function. 

If this restriction is to be maintained, and if scientific 
methods of statement are to be extended to fields such 
as those traditionally tended by philosophers, certain 
very subtle dangers must be provided for. Amongst 
these is the occurrence, in hitherto quite unsuspected 
numbers, of words which have been erroneously 
regarded without question as symbolic in function. 
The word ‘ good ’ may be taken as an example. It 



THE THEORY OF DEFINITION 


125 


seems probable that this word is essentially a collection 
of homonyms, such that the set of things, roughly, 
those in connection with which we heard it pronounced 
in early years (a good bed, a good kick, a good baby, 
a good God) have no common characteristic. But 
another use of the word is often asserted to occur, of 
which some at least of those which we have cited are 
supposed to be degenerations, where ‘ good ’ is alleged 
to stand for a unique, unanalysable concept. This 
concept, it is said, is the subject-matter of Ethics.^ 
This peculiar ethical use of ‘ good ’ is, we suggest, a 
purely emotive use. When so used the word stands 
for nothing whatever, and has no symbolic function. 
Thus, when we so use it in the sentence, 'This is good,’ 
we merely refer to this, and the addition of ‘ is good ’ 
makes no difference whatever to our reference. When 
on the other hand, we say 'This is red,’ the addition 
of ‘ is red ’ to ‘ this ’ does symbolize an extension of our 
reference, namely, to some other red thing. But ‘is 
good ’ has no comparable symbolic function; it serves 
only as an emotive sign expressing our attitude to this, 
and perhaps evoking similar attitudes in other persons, 
or inciting them to actions of one kind or another. 

The recognition that many of the most popular 
subjects of discussion are infested with symbolically 
blank but emotively active words of this kind is a 
necessary preliminary to the extension of scientific 
method to these questions. Another is some technique 
by which to ascertain which words are of this nature 
and on what occasions. Whether experimental and 
physiological methods can at present yield any result 
may be doubted, but the ultimate settlement of the 
matter can hardly be expected until tests in some 

^ Cf G, E Moore, Pnncipia Ethtca, Chap I Of course, if we 
define ‘ the good ' as ‘ that of which we approve of approving,' or 
give any such definition when wc say " This is good," we shall be 
making an assertion It is only the indefinable ' good' which we 
suggest to be a purely emotive sign The ' something more ' or some¬ 
thing else ' which, it is alleged, is not covered by any definition of 
* good ' IS the emotional aura of the word 



126 THE MEANING OF MEANING 

way independent of the opinion of the speaker are 
obtained. 

In all discussions we shall find that what is said is 
only in part determined by the things to which the 
speaker is referring. Often without a clear conscious¬ 
ness of the fact, people have preoccupations which 
determine their use of words. Unless we are aware of 
their purposes and interests at the moment, we shall 
not know what they are talking about and whether their 
referents are the same as ours or not. 

Purpose affects vocabulary in two ways. Sometimes 
without affecting reference it dictates the choice of 
symbols specially suited to an occasion. Thus, the 
language of a teacher in describing his spectroscope to 
a child may differ from that in which he describes it to 
his colleague or to his hancee without there being any 
difference in his reference. Or an elegant writer will 
ring the changes on a series of synonyms * without 
changing his reference. On the other hand, a physicist 
uses different language from that employed by his guide 
in order to discuss the Spectre of the Brocken ; their 
different purposes affect their language in this case 
through altering their references. 

It is plain that cases of the first kind are much 
simpler than those of the second; only the latter are 
likely to lead to vain controversies. Thus, if one dis¬ 
putant talks of public opinion he may be referring to 
what others would call the views of certain newspaper 
owners, in which case an argument as to whether the 
Press influences public opinion would tend to be incon¬ 
clusive in the absence of some third party familiar with 
the technique of definition. Such arguments are of 
constant occurrence even in the most intelligent circles, 
although when examined in the clear light of criticism 
they usually appear too foolish to be possible. 

But how should a discussion whose aim is the 
